MANHOOD;



THE



CAUSES OF ITS PREMATURE DECLINE,



WITH DIRECTIONS



FOR ITS



PERFECT RESTORATION;



ADDRESSED TO THOSE SUFFERING FROM THE DESTRUCTIVE



EFFECTS OF EXCESSIVE INDULGENCE, SOLITARY



HABITS, OR INFECTION;



FOLLOWED BY OBSERVATIONS ON



THE TREATMENT AND PRETENTION OF SYPHILIS,

. GONORRHOEA, AND GLEET;



iLLUSTRATED WITH



FORTY-FIVE ANATOMICAL ENGRAVINGS,



CASES, &c, &c.



"The foundation of a happy old age is an uninjured constitution in youth."



Plut. de lib. educ.





SIXTTTSBVEKTH THOUSAND.





BY J. L. CURTIS,



CONSULTING SURGEON.





LONDON:



PUBLISHED BY THE AUTHOR,



15, ALBEMARLE STREET, PICCADILLY, LONDON.



Sold By Piper & Co., 23, Paternoster Row, London; Berry & Co., ISA.



Great Britain Street, Dublin; W. & H. Robinson,



No. 11, Greenside Street, Edinbro'; And By All



English And Foreign Booksellers



And Chemists.



Entered at Stationers' Hall.



/fS2.



/ OA H. . //





PREFACE TO THE SIXTY-SEVENTH EDITION.



Of all the diseases to which mankind is liable, there are few more dangerous, accompanied with more varied symptoms, or which attack a greater number of vital organs, whether simultaneously, or successively, than those resulting from the immoderate discharge of the seminal fluid. Difference of age, temperament, climate, season, profession, &c, ceteris paribus, may induce different degrees of severity; but still they are all the same in kind, and require accordingly the same line of treatment, to be modified, of course, with respect to its activity, by individual circumstances. The commencement of these affections is, generally speaking, of a very insidious character, and frequently masked under the deceptive appearances of several other diseases: and what adds to the difficulty is, that the patient, so far from acknowledging the causes which have brought him to his wretched state more especially when such cause happens to be the hateful practice of masturbation, in general positively denies that he has ever indulged in such a practice, though he afterwards is forced to confess all. Should the unfortunate victim of self-pollution or excessive venery wilfully neglect his case, even after he has laid aside the debasing practice, he will linger, perhaps, for years, in a state of languor and debility; the joys of the marriage-bed and the delights of domestic happiness are for ever denied him; the love of offspring—the tenderest and most enchanting passion of the human heart—with him can never be gratified, his name and race will fade away and become extinct. Reduced by this execrable vice to the most abject state of human wretchedness— an object of commiseration to some who remember what he once was, in the full enjoyment of healthful vigor and manly promise, the fond idol of a mother's joy, the beloved staff of a father's hope in his declining age, now become a subject of ridicule to the heartless and unfeeling; pointed at by all as a beacon to caution others against the fatal rock on which his youthful hopes, and once brightened prospects, have been wrecked, is left to eke out a wretched and miserable existence, a prey to all the horrors of self-reproach, and a melancholy example of the vengeance of an angry God on those who, by abusing their bodies by the degrading habit of self-pollution, have, by the very worst and most sinful form of suicide, hurried themselves into a premature grave. To point out these dismal but certain effects of this unnatural and hideous vice—to send forth a warning voice to those addicted to its practice-to palliate, to relieve, and finally to remove such sad effects— to restore and re-establish the pristine health and vigor, when impaired by this foul habit—such were the views—such the objects I entertained in preparing the First edition of "Manhood" in 1840; such are the sentiments—such the feelings, which now influence me in sending forth this the SIXTY-SEVENTH EDITION after the lapse of twelve years.





The sale of 20,000 Copies Of This Wobk in so short a time, a fact, in corroboration of which I beg leave to subjoin the declarations before the Lord Mayor, first of my printer, and secondly of my bookbinder, cannot but be deemed a convincing proof of the large share of public confidence which I have enjoyed, and which I still continue to enjoy—an amount of confidence, in fact, which never could have been attained, did I not produce something of more sterling value than the idle parade of vain promises and empty professions, impudently couched in language pilfered and plagiarised. And here I feel called upon in justice to myself, as well as to the public, by way of Caution—to enter my decided and solemn protest against the daring effrontery and barefaced impudence of those ignorant pretenders to medical skill, who attempt to deceive the public by their announcements in the newspapers, professing to cure the same class of diseases to which I have devoted my exclusive energies for so long a period, and with such acknowledged and established success. The contemptible conduct as well as the total incapacity of these persons is sufficiently striking, when I solemnly assert, many pages of this work have been pirated by them.

In preparing the present improved and enlarged edition of "Manhood," I have taken due care amply to avail myself of the vast experience, which, considering the unprecedented share of public confidence with which I have been favoured, I must necessarily have attained in a class of diseases for which Pathology has as yet done so very little, that the only sure guide for





# their successful treatment must be an enlightened and well-trained experience, based on the only sure foundation—Extended Practice.

From a vast number of new cases which have been successfully treated by me, I take the opportunity of inserting a few for the reader's perusal.



DECLARATIONS.



I, William Whinrey Gearing, of Smart's Buildings, Holborn, in the County of Middlesex, Printer, do solemnly declare that I have printed Nineteen Thousand Five Hundred Copies of Mr. J. L. Curtis's Medical Work, "Manhood," exclusive of the twentieth edition now printing by me, and that the whole of these copies were duly delivered to Mr. William Wilton, Bookbinder, residing at No. 6, Bream's Buildings, Chancery Lane, from the month of May, one thousand eight hundred and forty, to February, one thousand eight hundred and forty-four; and I make this solemn declaration, conscientiously believing the same to be true, and by virtue of the provisions of an Act made and passed in the sixth year of the reign of His late Majesty, intituled "An Act to repeal an Act of the present Session of Parliament, intituled ' An Act for the more effectual abolition of Oaths and Affirmations taken and made in various departments of the State, and to substitute declarations in lieu thereof, and for the more entire suppression of voluntary and extra Judicial Oaths and Affidavits, and to make other provisions for the abolition of unnecessary Oaths.'"

WILLIAM WHINREY GEARING.

Declared and subscribed at the

Mansion House, London,! WILLIAM MAGNAY,

this 6th day of April, 1844, / Lord Mayor of London,



before me, J



I, William Wilton, of No. 6, Bream's Buildings, ChanceryLane, London, Bookbinder, do solemnly and sincerely declare that I have bound nineteen thousand five hundred copies of Mr. J. L. Curtis's Medical Work, "Manhood," exclusive of





The cases annexed in the form of an Appendix, to illustrate the principles here laid down, both with regard to the several diseases treated, as also with respect to their prevention and cure, will, I trust, be found not the least interesting part of the book.

And as there may be some of our readers who may think that the description given in this work, of the gross enormity and terrific consequences of indulging in the vicious habit of self-pollution, has been exaggerated by us, I shall take the liberty of adducing a few passages from Holy Writ itself, in corroboration of the sentiments expressed by me. The validity of an appeal to such an authority is irrefragable and undeniable, inasmuch as its truth is above impeachment, and its purity above suspicion. Nor shall I allow myself to be deterred from appealing to such a tribunal by the sneer of the infidel. The object I have proposed to myself in the composition of this work, is, I trust, good, and every legitimate means which I can employ to enhance its value, and recommend its perusal to the youth, ay, and to the adults, among our countrymen, I am determined to avail myself of. We all know that, to different individuals, different species of proof bring different degrees of conviction; but in the present case, wherein I adduce observed, established and authenticated facts and results, and when I trace these facts and results by the process of analytical reasoning, and by the laws of induction, to their causes, and when I make it manifest, that such causes are adequate to produce such and such effects,—when, in addition to all this human demonstration, I bring to my aid the word of God himself, who neither "can deceive, nor be deceived,"—unwieldy and obdurate indeed must that man be, who can resist the combined force of such overwhelming authorities. The feelings which must excite the physician, while writing on the subject of Onanism, are pain and hope: pain, on account of the necessity for his advice and admonition; hope, that he may remove the delusion under which the infatuated victims of this vice labour: that the practice is a vice, a most pernicious vice, and which calls alike for the reprobation of the moralist as well as the physician, cannot be denied; it is an offence in the eye of our Creator.





INTRODUCTION.



The object of the present Treatise is to describe the causes, both physical and moral, which lead to the practice of self-pollution; the terrific effects of this practice, and the best and most efficient means which can be adopted for its cure. The subject of Impuissance, or Sexual Debility, as being of singular importance, and one in which the interests of society at large, and not merely of its unhappy victims, are so vitally concerned, has received consideration in a separate and distinct article. To this part of the subject I have paid the most anxious and untiring attention from a very early period of my professional career. It is one, in fact, in which not a day passes that I am not consulted, either by personal visit, or by correspondents in different parts of the kingdom, and I feel that I am not exceeding the limits of truth, nor transgressing the bounds of professional etiquette, in asserting that the mode of practice, suggested and improved by long and multiplied experience, has been productive of the happiest and most successful results in the treatment of sexual debility in both sexes.

The manner in which I have endeavoured to connect the effects produced by masturbation on the physiological functions of the several organs of the body, will, I trust, be found sufficiently clear even for the nonmedical reader. The accounts given in books with respect to the ruinous effects of onanism, cannot but appear exaggerated, unless the necessary connexion between these effects and the habit itself be clearly demonstrated. Hence arose the necessity of entering somewhat into the physiology of the organs, without which the pathological changes are, and must appear to be unintelligible and over-rated to the popular reader, for whom this work is in a manner almost exclusively destined.





religion and our own reason would of themselves instruct us, that to destroy that end must be very offensive to God; and I cannot refrain from quoting the words of a learned divine, while speaking of this shameful and disgusting practice, "The crime in itself," says he, "is monstrous and unnatural—in its prdctice filthy and odious to extremity—its guilt is crying and its consequences ruinous—it destroys conjugal affectionprevents natural inclination—and tends to extinguish the hopes of posterity."

I shall not here meddle with the causes of uncleanliness in general, as these are sufficiently treated of in most books of devotion and practical divinity, so I refer our readers to them, and design only to speak of those peculiar causes which belong to this sin, and hardly any other. The first cause is ignorance of the enormity of the crime.—There are thousands among the youths of both sexes, ingenuous, docile, diligent, and tractable, who, either by the example of their intimates, through their own wantonness, or by being idle and alone, and some again by mere accident, have learned to pollute themselves after this manner, who would have abhorred the thought had they understood the nature of the sin, and been acquainted with the heinousness of the crime. The second is the secrecy with which self-pollution may be committed; all other actions of uncleanliness must have a witness —this needs none. The third and last cause I shall allege is impurity; though the laws against adultery are in many places very remiss or ill executed, yet the dread of them keeps the fearful in awe. The punishment for unnatural impurities committed with others is capital, whereas, in self-pollution neither the cautious or the covetous imagine they have anything to fear. What a strange thing it is, therefore, that a man should show bashfulness and the utmost cowardice to his fellow-creature (even should that fellowcreature be the most impotent wretch), and that he should behave with gigantic boldness and impudence to the Almighty Creator of heaven and earth. What comfort must a man have in reflecting on the past actions of his life, who hardly coming to half the age he might reasonably have expected to have arrived at, finds himself enervated by the practice of self-pollution, his spirits sunk, his body wasted, and his strength decayed, and in continual danger of being forced to resign his impure breath upon the least inclemency of the season, or any other trifling accident?





Many individuals scarcely turned of forty years of age, and sometimes even earlier, who have lived rather freely, are not unfrequently about that period of life, greatly changed in their powers of sexual intercourse. They may, indeed, in general health and personal appearance, be stout, and, for several years, not very sensible of the degeneration of their powers, but the frequency of their inclination for such duties gradually becomes much diminished, and that is a symptom which is at all times indicative of approaching impotence ; for the inclination gradually and entirely ceasing, the power speedily follows, or rather both are lost together. In others, about the same time of life, the physical power ceases first, and the inclination continuing often for many years after, they are obliged to gratify themselves in amusements which are the mere pantomime of amorous indulgences.'—such individuals, being otherwise in tolerable health, are recoverable.

Before concluding this introduction, I think it but right to mention that in many instances patients who have in early life indulged in the habit of self-pollution, are frequently, many years after they have abandoned the pernicious habit, annoyed and rendered wretched by the consequences which it has left behind it. Such persons are troubled with seminal involuntary discharges, pains in the back and limbs, and several other anomalous symptoms, which the experienced practitioner will at once refer to their true origin. To such persons I would earnestly recommend an early application. Daily, nay, hourly experience has convinced me of the necessity of such application, and of the consoling advantages to be derived from it. The peculiar treatment which I adopt in those cases of involuntary seminal discharge— the success of which is most satisfactorily established by ample experience—is of such a nature, as to insure to the patient so circumstanced, a perfect restoration of strength and vigour. For cases bearing on this particular, see towards the conclusion.





It is of course unnecessary to state that the success of the treatment here recommended, as well as the celerity of the cure, are, in all cases, invariably proportioned to the earliness of application for my professional assistance, as well as to the scrupulous attention with which my directions are complied with.



ADDENDUM TO THE FIFTY-EIGHTH EDITION.

It will not, I am sure, be deemed irrelevant, if I here present to the reader a statement of the motives which influenced me in thus devoting myself exclusively to this important branch of medical practice, having, from an early period of my professional life, determined on making the diseases of the male sexual system my exclusive line of practice. The advantages of a division of labour are nowhere more evident than in medicine. This determination I was induced to adopt, from observing the strange and unaccountable anomaly, namely, that the ordinary and general run of medical practitioners, who engage in the treatment of all manner of diseases indiscriminately, have obviously not paid that attention to diseases of the sexual system, and more especially to those affections which are the results of onanism, excessive venereal indulgence, and infection, which they have to other affections, which are not near so important either in a social, religious, or individual point of view. The consequence of this apathy on the part of the ordinary practitioner, has opened a wide field for the daring and ignorant, who usurping the ground thus left unoccupied by the educated surgeon through motives of mistaken professional delicacy, commit their daily and dreadful ravages on a too confiding public, who are proverbially known to place a confidence in such impudent pretenders, proportioned to the barefacedness of their claims, and their ignorance of disease. Impressed with the thorough conviction of the necessity of this neglected branch of medical science being attended to by men who have received a regular professional education, I have for my own part, since my entrance into the profession, devoted a considerable portion of my time and attention to investigate the nature and best mode of treatment of all those affections, connected, whether remotely or proximately, with early abuses of the generative organs; whether such abuse may consist in the unnatural practice of self-pollution, in excessive indulgence in venereal pleasures, or in the effects too often left behind by infectious diseases of these organs—effects occasioned either by neglect of the disease, or by its injudicious treatment. In order to be understood with respect to the affections remotely connected with early abuse, I need only refer to the daily, nay, hourly occurrence of the most anomalous cases in





Eersons of both sexes; some will complain of constant eadaches, pains in the limbs, debility and relaxation of the flexor and extensor muscles of" the extremities, teazing cough; others, again, will complain of palpitations, weakness of stomach, and of all the digestive organs, from the comparatively trifling symptoms of indigestion to the more serious symptoms of total aversion to food. Let persons so affected be brought to an ordinary and general practitioner, but one who has not deemed it compatible with his professional dignity to devote any particular attention to the mischievous effects of sexual abuse; and if his patient should for instance complain of headache, he will probably, without further investigating the origin of the disease, take it for granted that such headache is the result of determination to the brain, and accordingly prescribe bleeding, purging, and other debilitating remedies. What must the consequence be in such a case if the headache should arise, as we know it may, from exhaustion of the nervous centres occasioned by masturbation, or by excessive venery? What else but the most disastrous? A patient, already exhausted by one of the most effectual consumers of the vital energies, is subjected to a course of treatment the very reverse of that which his state requires. The little strength which the destructive habit may have left him, is sure to be taken from him by the doctor—I need say no more.

Another patient comes to the mere routine practitioner with a long list of symptoms, such as tremors, partial paralysis, occasional flushing of face, dizziness of the head, cum multis aliis; the doctor, fancying that such symptoms clearly indicate approaching apoplexy, bleeds, blisters, vomits, and purges the very vitals out of the unfortunate patient, whose ailments, if carefully investigated, are in reality all attributable to self-pollution, and consequently require a diametrically opposite mode of treatment





How often do I not meet, in my every-day practice, cases such as the following: a young woman is brought to me, whose chief ailments are palpitations of the heart, short dry cough, occasional headache, great aversion to making exertion of any kind, great languor and lassitude, loss of appetite, or else perverted appetite, irregular, but in general deficient, menstruation, swelling of the ancles, puffiness of the face, with a chlorotic cast of countenance, tendency to hysterics, &c.

Full oft and many a time have I detected the real source and origin of such affections to be neither more nor less than the long-indulged habit of self-pollution. Numerous are the cases which my professional experience could supply of this kind. What I would impress upon the reader's mind is this; that a person not accustomed to observe and investigate such cases, cannot possess that tact, that incommunicable tact not to be acquired by the perusal of any other book, save the book of nature; it is this tact alone which will enable him to penetrate into the recondite and remote causes of these diseases; his eye, his touch, nay, every sense and faculty must be assiduously and carefully educated, in order that he may be able to detect the real seat and nature of the disease in question. I have, moreover, good reason to know that such a practitioner, when by his judicious mode of examining his patient he has gained his or her confidence, will be much more successful in eliciting an acknowledgment with respect to the habits which the person may have indulged in, and which may have been the real cause of the disease, than the man who will take it for granted that the feelings and ailments referred to the head, back, chest or abdomen, have their rise and origin in these cavities, and will not reflect that such ailments are but the symptoms or effects of the serious injury done to the nervous system by the destructive habit of self-abuse. Numerous are the occasions where I have succeeded, by a well-connected series of questions, in obtaining a candid acknowledgment from the blushing stripling of his having indulged in this vile habit.





Some may say that I have overwrought the picture in this my description of the hideous consequences of onanism, because, forsooth, the rise of years, and the maturity of reason, frequently assist in subduing this propensity after the individual has indulged in it for a length of time. It is, however, when old age begins to come on, and when the energies of the body are on the wane, that the effects of the indiscretions of youth will show themselves; 'tis then the autumn of life, and its precipitate and pitiable decay will be embittered by the recollection of former transgressions against the laws of nature and of nature's God, and by the harrowing and torturing consciousness of having misapplied and grossly abused those physical and moral endowments conferred by a beneficent and all-wise Creator for the purpose of propagating the species, and of contributing our mite to the extension and cultivation of that society to which we all belong, but against whose interests we may have so scandalously rebelled.

The effects of the practice of self-abuse have been too frequently mistaken for other diseases. This arises partly from the want of sincerity and candour on the part of the patient, who, not acknowledging the true source of his distemper, deceives and misleads his medical adviser; partly, also, from the medical practitioner himself not being accustomed to meet cases of the kind, or not having devoted sufficient attention to their investigation, without which it is impossible to attain that discriminating tact which is so necessary to detect the cunning and artifice practised by patients in concealing the destructive source of so many complicated maladies; the medical practitioner himself, from the causes now alleged, too often overlooks, or is deceived as to the nature of the case submitted to his treatment. What he sets down to be originally seated in the brain, spinal cord, lungs, heart, stomach, or intestinal canal, simulating idiopathic epilepsy, paralysis, phthisis, indigestion, diarrhoea, or obstinate constipation of the bowels, is, in reality, nothing else but the dismal effect of this ruinous practice.





With respect to impotence, or sexual debility, one of the most frequent as well as most distressing consequences of the baneful habit of self-abuse, I can safely and confidently assert, that my method of treatment, a method founded on an experience of many years, and on a close investigation of the nature and proximate causes of the disease, will be found to combine all the beneficial effects likely to result from a judicious application of medicinal means, to both mind and body. The employment of the so called aphrodisiac medicines in the removal of this disease is too frequently attended with the very worst effects. When it is known, that medicines to which aphrodisiac virtues are imputed are all powerful irritants, and that they exert their peculiar powers on the delicate mucous membranes of the genital and urinary organs, producing bloody urine, &c, it will scarcely be necessary to point out even to the non-professional reader the dangers incurred in their use, and yet this is the class of medicines chiefly relied on by certain parties in the treatment of sexual debility. The practitioner who has duly studied the physiology of the generative functions, and the complex machinery involved in their discharge, knows full well the respective shares which both the mind and the body have in the due and effective performance of this function. He knows that in order that this act be performed well, two things are indispensably necessary; the body must be in good health, and the mind should be perfectly confident of the powers of the body. He should have no difficulties— no fear—no apprehension, not even an anxiety to perform the act well. No function, in fact, of the entire machine is so dependent on the mind as this; the will and reasoning faculty have nothing whatever to do with this power, and yet there is no natural act in the adequate performance of which a man feels so deeply interested, his pride ever being more or less engaged in it. To those, therefore, who may have impaired their powers in discharging this function, either by selfabuse, excessive venereal indulgence, or any other circumstance, I hold out the most encouraging hopes of a speedy and effectual restoration to health and vigour, by the adoption of those physical and moral remedies, which I have been employing for so long a time with such signal success, and which I have never yet found to fail in a single instance, provided my directions were duly complied with.





My object in introducing Illustrated Engravings in this Edition is to exemplify, as nearly as possible, the various Urinary Diseases in man, and thus familiarise the non-medical reader by the description of each subject, commencing with the Anatomy of the Generative System.



GENERAL NOTICE TO PATIENTS.

It is earnestly requested that Patients who are in correspondence with Mb. Cubtis, will always preserve the same signature or initial, as all letters are arranged alphabetically, it being necessary, on frequent occasions, to refer to previous letters.

N.B.—Those Patients residing in small towns or villages, who fear detection from addressing their letters to Mb. Cubtis, can use the address at foot, which letters will be received and opened by the Author only:

JOHN LAMBERT, Esq.,

ALBEMABLE STREET, PICCADILLY,

LONDON.





DESCRIPTION TO THE PLATES.



PLATE 1.

A Front View of the Thoracic Viscera, Urinary, and Generative Organs in Man.

A. The Tbachea.

BBB. The Bronchial Pipes, through which the air passes into CCCC, the right and left lobes of the Lungs (the lungs are drawn aside to show the heart).

D. The Heart.

EE. The Aorta, through which the blood is distributed from the heart through the body.

FF. The Vems Cawe, by which vein the blood is received from its numerous branches to be purified by the lungs.

GG. The Renal Artery, which supplies the kidneys with blood.

HH. The Veins which convey the blood away from the kidneys.

II. The Kidneys, with the Ureters J J, which convey the urine from the kidneys to the bladder.

K. The Spermatic Veins.

LL. The Spermatic Arteries.

M. The Glans of the Penis.

NOP. The Spermatic Vessels. QQ. The Inguinal Canal. RR. The Testes. SS. The Vasa Deferentia.

II. The Psoas Muscles. UU. The Ossa Ilia. V. The RecTum. W. Part of the Abdominal Flap- turned over. X. The Umbilical Artery of the Liver YT. Z. Part of the Stomach.

ab. The two lobes of the Left Lung. cde. The three lobes of the Right Lung. ff. The Diaphragm, gg. A portion of the Rib Bones, h. Part of the Omentum, i. The Scrotum, k. The Urachus.





DESCRIPTION OF PLATE 2.

A. Sectional View of the Abdomen, Pelvis, Urinary, and Generative Organs in the side of a Man.

A. The Aorta.

B. The Ven2e Cav.s.

C. The Eight Kidney.

D. The Left Kidney.

E. The Left Ureter.

F. The Ureter entering the Bladder.

G. The Bladder.

HH. The Prostate Gland.

II. A Catheter passed up the Urethra into the Bladder.

J. The Bulb of the Penis.

K. The Penis.

L. The Suspensory Ligament of the Penis.

MN. The Corpus Cavernosum Penis.

0. The Tendinous Ligament of the Bladder.

P. A section of the Os Pubis, near its Symphisis.

Q. The Fundus Vesica.

R. Part of the Peritoneum. SS. Part of the Intestines.

TUV. The Spermatic Blood Vessels.

W. The Left Testicle.

X. The Epididymis.

Y. The Left Vas Deferens.

Z. The Bight Vesiculjs Seminales.

a. The Renal Glands, b. The PsoiE Muscle, Ccc. The LumBar Vertebrae, d. The Os Sacrum, ef. The Os Coccygis. g. The Sphincter Ani. h. The Levator Ani. i. The Anus. j. A Section of the Integuments, k. The Glans (or nut) of the Penis. II. The Urethra. m. The Scrotum, nn. The Rectum, op. The Iliac Artery, rs. Branches of the Umbilical Artery.





DESCRIPTION TO PLATE 3.

Figure 1 represents a front view of the Generative Organs.

A. The Bladder. BB. The Ureters. CC. The Seminal Canal with the Artert DD. EE. Part of the Vesicul^e SemiNales. F. The Neck of the Bladder, surrounded by the Prostate Gland GG. H. Part of the Suspensory Ligament of the Penis.

II. The Dorsal Vein. When the Penis is filled with blood, the Erector Muscles (JJ) press upon this vein, and also upon the Nerves and Arteries (KK), and thereby produce and continue the erection and stiffness of the Penis.

L. The Glans Penis, with the Prepuce or Foreskin MM.

Figure 2 represents a Back View of the Generative Organs.

A. The Bladder.

BB. The Spermatic Artery, Vein and Nerve, through which the blood passes from the Heart into the Testicle (C) to be secreted into seed; after the seed is secreted in the testicle, it passes through the Seed Vessels (DE) into the Epididymis (FGH) which is composed of minute tubes; the seed enters the Vas Deferens (II) and passes through this tube into the Vesicul^; Seminales (JJ) or Reservoirs, which are situated on the back of the bladder, and it is in these reservoirs that the seed is contained until required for use. When sexual intercourse takes place, the seed passes through the Prostate Gland (KK) into the Urethra (L), and from thence into the Vagina of the Female.

MM. Cowter's Glands. NN. The Bulb of the Urethra. 00. The Erector Muscles, PP. The Dorsal Veins, QQ. The Arteries of the Penis, KB.

SS. The Glans Penis, with the Orifice or Lips T, on which gonorrhoea first shows itself.

UU. The Raphe of which joins the Anus V. W. The CreMaster Muscles, X. ThelnguiNALCANAL,YY. ZZ. The Ureters.

Figure 3 represents a Section of the Penis cut longitudinally and laterally.

AAAA. The Corpora Cavernosa. B. The Septum. C. The Dorsal Vein, with its numerous branches. D. The outer skin of the Penis.

Figure 4 represents a Sectional View of the Seed Vesicles that are situated on the bach part of the Bladder.

AA,BB,CC. Part of the Vasa Deferentia, through which the semen has to pass from the Testicle before it can be deposited in the Vesiculie Seminales, DD; it then remains in the vessels until required during the act of coition, but when drawn away by self-pollution, these vessels lose their retentive qualities, the semen flows away, and the system becomes exhausted of its sap. EE. The Vasa Deferentia. FF. The Septum. G. The Urethra. HII. The Arteries. JJ. The Prostate Gland. KK. The Bladder. Figure 5 represents a Sectional View of the Penis.

AA. The Corpora Cavernosa. B. The Mucous Follicles of the Urethra. C. The Penis. D. The Prepuce. E. The "frieNum. F. The Glans. G. The Dorsal Vein. II The Septum.





1





DESCRIPTION TO PLATE 4.

Figure 1. A View of the Spermatic Cord and Testicle of the left side (natural size).

A. The Vasa Pr.sparantia. B. The Vessels of the Testicle running in the Spermatic Cord freed from their membranes. CCC. The Arteeies of the Testicle. DD. The Corresponding Veins. E. The Tunica Albuginea. F. Part of the Tunica Vaginalis turned back. GHI. The Epididymis. K. The End of the Epididymis and the Beginning of the Vas Deferens, L.

Figure 2. The Blood Vessels and Seminal Ducts of the Testicle (natural size).

A. The Spermatic Artery. B. The Spermatic Veins. CC. The Vas Deferens. D. The Testicle with its coats cut and pinned back.

FigureZ represents Spermatozoa found in the Semen of a Man.

The Spermatozoa are so small, that their minuteness is beyond the power of conception, and their size can only be determined by mathematical examination: for the examining these minute beings, an achromatic Instrument, on the best construction, with a magnifying power of three hundred diameters, is required. The form of these animalcules consist of an elliptical head, and body formed by a dark outline, enclosing the transparent portion within. In some there is a black spot, in the transparent part about its centre; from the body a long tail projects. These living animalcules abound in multitudes in the semen of a male that is healthy and capable of impregnating the female, but in the seed of any person that is impotent they have never been found; which serves to prove, beyond doubt, upon examining the semen of the male, whether the impotency and want of offspring is the fault of the male or female.

Figure 4 represents Spermatozoa found in the Semen of a Mouse.

Figure 5 represents Spermatozoa found in the Semen of a Dog.

Figure 6 represents Spermatozoa found in the Semen of a Bear.

Figure 7 represents Spermatozoa found in the Semen of a Rabbit.





DESCRIPTION TO PLATE 5.

Figure 1 represents the front view of a Testicle, with the Tunica Vaginalis, or outer covering, cut open, to show the glandular structure of the Testis and Epidydimis. (Drawn the size of life. J A. The Spermatic Artery, through which the blood is conveyed from the heart into the Testicle B (an oval gland), -wherein the seed is secreted; after the seed is secreted, it passes through the Epididymis (C) into the Vas Deferens (D). E. The Tunica Vaginalis. F. The Cremasteb Muscle.

Figure 2 represents a posterior view of the Testicle, shewing the Vas Deferens and Epididymis uncovered.

A. The Tunica Vaginalis. B. Part of the Testis uncovered. C. The Spermatic Artebtes, which run into the Testicle. D. The Cords of the Vas Deferens, E. Figure 3 represents the course of the Spermatic Arteries, and their

numerous ramifications in the Testis, wherein the blood is deposited

to be secreted into seed (which process goes on day and night in a

healthy subject).

A. The Spermatic Artery, which conveys the blood through its numerous Branches (BB), in all directions in the Testis.

C. The Vas Deferens, where an Artery (D) accompanies the Vas Deferens (EE) into the seminal reservoir on the back part of the bladder.

Figure 4 represents the whole semeniferous structure of the Seed Vessels, with their numerous ramifying canals, into which the seed is absorbedfrom tlie arteries.

A. The Arteries going down to the Testes.

B. A portion of the Arteries which are seen returning up from the bottom of the Testes.

C. The Vessels which absorb the seed from the Arteries.

D. The Bete, or seed canal of the Testes.

E. The Vasa Deferentia, through which the seed passes from the Bete, into E, the Body of the Epididymis, and G, the Vas Deferens.

[note.—It may be here remarked that the seed vessels in the Testis, when unravelled, measure about 40 feet in length, and it is supposed that the uncontrollable excess of pleasure derived during coition is caused at the time the seed is passing through these vessels into the Vagina of the Female.]





DESCRIPTION TO PLATE 6.

Varicocele.

Varicocele is one of those diseases which the male sex is particularly liable to, in consequence of the length of the spermatic veins, the pendulous state of the testicles, the uncertain quantity of blood that is sent into them, and their unfitness to return it; and I think that Varicocele is as common in the male sex, as the disease of fluor-albus, or whites, is in the female, that probably one person in every three suffers from the complaint, more or less.

It is a disease which arises through a general relaxation of the arterial and venous system, which relaxation is produced by various causes, but more commonly arises from the unnatural act of Selfpollution.

In the preceding portion of my work, I have endeavoured to explain that the blood is conveyed from the aorta, or great artery, into the testicles, for the purpose of being secreted into seed, so as to be ready for use in the vesicula seminales, under the wise dispensation of Providence, which is given to man for the voluptuous enjoyment of venery, and for the reproduction of mankind; the testicles are also provided with veins to carry away the blood after the seed has been secreted in the testicle, and returns through the vena cava, or great vein, to be purified by the lungs; it then returns back into the aorta again to perform its functional duties.

Now it is evident that if unnatural means are used to produce the voluptuous enjoyment of venereal pleasure, the vessels become acted upon immoderately, the system is drained of its sap, or vital juice, which is difficult to replenish, so that, during the act of Selfpollution, or upon any unnatural excitement of the genitals, more blood is brought into the testicle than it has strength to secrete into seed; therefore the blood cannot pass through, and congestion takes place, inflammation follows, and mortification is the sequel: but the more common result of these acts of unnatural gratification is, that the veins in the testicles swell, and, by pressing continually upon the gland of the testicle, cause it to give way and dwindle, the muscular fibres of the testicle and scrotum relax, drop down, and hang devoid of any muscular power whatever, and when felt by the fingers appear like a bag of earthworms, exactly as shewn in the engraving, Plate 6.

In describing the Engraving, Plate 6, the Penis is shewn, held up by the finger and thumb, for the purpose of shewing the testicles. A portion of the scrotum has been cut away to exhibit the healthy testicle of the right side, and the diseased testicle of the left side, which demonstrates the effects Self-pollution has had upon the genital organs, and also shows how requisite it is for medical aid to be obtained so soon as the patient finds the symptoms appear.





DESCRIPTION TO PLATE 7.

Relaxation of the Scrotum.

There is another kind of disease arising from Self-pollution, which is a total relaxation of both testicles, similar to what is shewn in the Engraving, Plate 7, and is a more aggravated disease than Varicocele, but requiring the same means of cure (in some cases that have come under my notice, the scrotum and testes have hung down from the abdomen about twelve inches, and appeared as though they dragged the belly down with them, occasioning to the sufferer intense pain, similar to Varicocele, but more excruciating, accompanied with watery loose discharges from the anus, similar to the bowel complaint).



DESCRIPTION TO PLATE 8.

Undescended Testis.

There is another complaint the male sex is liable to, which is Undescended Testis in the adult, as shewn in Plate 8, Pig. 1.

A. The Undescended Testicle, oftentimes the cause of impotency.

B. The Epididymis.

C. D. The Spermatic Vessels and Vas Deferens.

E. The Peritoneum, lining the Abdominal Muscles.

F. The right side of the Scrotum, containing the right testicle in a healthy state.

G. The left Scrotum empty; the testicle being in the groin, not having passed through the abdominal ring before Dirth.

Figs. 2 and 3, represent the Testicle of the right side wasted through the effects of Self-pollution, invariably producing a complete want of erection and desire for the embraces of the female.

Evaporation, or Wasting of the Testis.

Wasting of the Testicle, as shewn in Plate 8, Figs. 2 and 3, is the effect of inflammation and absorption of the gland, which takes place more frequently at the age of puberty than at any other period. The inflammation does, however, sometimes occur spontaneously, or without any obvious cause, and is often the effect of gonorrhoea. Under these circumstances the testicle inflames, and swells to several times the natural bulk. It then begins to absorb as the inflammation subsides, and proceeds on until the whole of the glandular structure of the organ is absorbed.

It is a curious circumstance, that if a boy of fifteen or so get a gonorrhoea, it is often succeeded by a wasting of one or both testicles.





DESCRIPTION TO PLATE 15.

Cancer on the Scrotum.

Fig. 1. The first appearance of this disease is a warty excrescence upon the Scrotum, assuming an encrusted form, continuing to cover its surface. If this incrustation is rubbed or picked off, the wart will appear red and broken. An incrustation again appears on the wart, which remains until accident or the progress of ulceration removes it, and then the surface appears highly vascular, and discharges a bloody serum. At the commencement of this disease the patient experiences a troublesome itching, but as the disease advances, sharp sensations shoot through the part. As the ulceration proceeds, it extends to the absorbent glands of the groin, they become hard, swollen and ulcerate, but when the testicle has become involved in the disease, the lumbar glands become hard and swollen also, and, unless very prompt means are used, the patient's life is slowly exhausted by the high degree of constitutional irritation, as well as by the debility induced by the excessive discharge.

Chronic Abscess.

Figure 2 represents the granular swelling of the testes after a Chronic Abscess. With respect to the causes of this disease, it is wrong to view it merely as a local affection, for there are persons , who have a constitutional tendency to this complaint.

It often occurs in scrofulous persons, but more commonly proceeds from a constitution worn and broken down by intemperance, in persons where the vital powers are diminished, or by a longcontinued course of Mercury in the cure of obstinate and indolent Chancre, too frequent exposure to wet, cold, or fatigue, and an excessive indulgence in venereal pleasures, but the most frequent cause is urethral discharge.



DESCRIPTION TO PLATE 16.

Strictures of the Urethra.

There are three kinds of Stricture, which are thus denominated,— the Permanent, Spasmodic, and Inflammatory.

The Permanent Stricture is the result of a thickening of the urethra from chronic inflammation. The Spasmodic Stricture arises either from a contraction of the muscles surrounding the urethra, or from the urethra itself. The Inflammatory Stricture is produced through inflammation of the acute kind, which generally succeeds the acute Gonorrhoea.

At the commencement of the formation of every permanent Stricture there is a retention of a few drops of urine in the urethra,

B





after the whole appears to have been discharged; so that, when the penis has been returned into the small-clothes, the linen becomes slightly wetted, and if you press on the under side of the urethra a few more drops will be voided. The next circumstance is an irritable state of the bladder; which is evinced by the person not being enabled to sleep so long as usual without discharging his urine. A man in good health will not be obliged to empty his bladder for eight or nine hours, and some can go for a longer time, but when he has a stricture, he cannot continue for a longer period than three or four hours, and frequently much less than this time.

The next circumstance in Stricture (and which is always a true prognostic of the existence of stricture) is the division of the stream; sometimes the stream splits in two, becoming forked; sometimes it is spiral; at other times it forms as it were a thin sheath. In addition, there will be a discharge from the urethra, which renders the linen of a bluish white, similar to the appearances produced by nocturnal emissions; if the patient rides much on horseback, the urine will be high-coloured, which is dependent upon the degree of excitement existing in the urethra. The next circumstance the patient notices is, that he discharges his urine by drops; and, through the irritable state of the bladder, the water is continually dropping from the orifice of the urethra.

The next circumstance observable is the discharge of a considerable quantity of mucus along with the urine; the urine when discharged is as transparent as usual, but when it has cooled, the mucus descends to the bottom, where it appears ropy, and adheres to the vessel. As the inflammation of the membrane increases, the urine becomes yellow, but when allowed to cool the mucus sinks, to the bottom. When the disease is of a very aggravated nature, the urine will become quite white. When the urine is bloody, it is a proof that ulceration has commenced. Those parts of the urethra which are more commonly liable to be strictured, are these :— First, that portion anterior to the bulb, just where it joins the corpus spongiosum—this part is naturally contracted and small, as shewn in Plate 16, Fig. 1; there is also another part liable to stricture, which is near the glans penis. The next situation in which we find stricture is in the membranous portion of the urethra, or that part between the bulb and prostate gland (as shewn in Plate 16, Fig. 1). The next situation is in the prostate gland itself (as shewn in Plate 16, Fig. 4).

In some cases of Stricture, we find an accumulation of adhesive matter in the upper portion of the urethra (as shewn in Plate 16, P ig. 3). The last figure of Stricture (as shewn in Plate 16, Fig. 5) represents the urethra torn by a patient having improperly introduced a bougie, being driven to madness through not being able to pass his urine; this person forced a bougie, as he thought, through the Stricture, instead of which he had lacerated the urethra and a portion of the corpora cavernosa; inflammation followed, and death terminated his sufferings; whereas, by skilfully introducing a propal-sized bougie, his life might have been preserved.





MANHOOD;

THE CAUSES OF ITS PREMATURE DECLINE,



ONANISM.

The term Masturbation, from manus—the hand, and stupro—I defile, is the term more usually employed to express the idea intended to be conveyed in Holy Writ by the term Onanism, or the sin of Onan. As the term Onanism, however, more strikingly expresses both the disgusting and destructive habit itself, as well as the punishment entailed on it, I have preferred it as the heading for this article.

There are, I am well aware, many persons who, from an overstrained and overweening sense of modesty, object to the publication of books such as the present. They think that the perusal of such works has a tendency to suggest the abominable practice of which it treats, and whose dreadful effects it seeks to prevent and remedy, to persons of both sexes, who would otherwise never have dreamed of it. I freely admit that this objection would not be devoid of weight, were the practice less extended and less indulged in; unfortunately, I have good reason to know, from the position in which I am placed as a medical practitioner, that the habit is so well understood, and so generally indulged in, that it requires not the aid of reading for its dissemination; nor is theory at all in danger of rendering that more general, or more alluring, which is now unfortunately so firmly established and so- deeply rooted in our manners by the almost overwhelming force of practice. Nay, more, I have no hesitation in saying, that there is every reason to believe that there cannot be a more effectual means adopted for preventing an indulgence in the habit of self-pollution, than by pointing out to persons of both sexes the frightful consequences, both to body and mind, which inevitably follow from it.





The necessity of defining the meaning of the terms Onanism, Masturbation, or Self-pollution, it will be readily admitted, does not exist. I shall therefore restrict myself to pointing out the causes which lead young persons to indulge in the filthy habit, to detailing the direful results which follow from such indulgence, and also the best means—both hygemic and medicinal, either for preventing young persons from addicting themselves to the practice, or for remedying the numerous and frightful diseases which it invariably brings with it.

It is an opinion entertained by many eminent and distinguished medical practitioners, an opinion, also, which seems to be supported by numerous and wellattested facts, that the diseases occasioned by indulgence in self-pollution become more frequent in proportion as society becomes more polished and more refined. Such a mischievous result cannot, however, for a moment be connected necessarily or naturally with the increasing improvements in the social state; it is produced. only in a secondary manner,—and I feel convinced that it would be very possible, by removing the circumstances which favour and increase the corruption of public morals, if not to abolish altogether the ruinous habit of self-pollution, at least to diminish considerably the number of its miserable victims. As one of the most effectual means of bringing about this desirable result, I take the liberty of proposing that more importance should be attached to the moral education of children, a part of education almost entirely neglected by the moderns, who seem more anxious to expedite the development of the intellectual powers, and to store the minds of youth with the varied and multifarious branches of science and art, than to cultivate their moral faculties, and to direct them to the practice of virtue. It is chiefly on the youth of both sexes that selfpollution commits most ravages; this is so much the more mischievous, and so much the more to he deplored, as it thus strikes at the very root of society, and has a direct and immediate tendency to destroy it, by enervating and debilitating, almost from their very cradle, those individuals whom nature and nature's God intended as best adapted to preserve and adorn it. How many of these debilitated and emaciated objects do not daily present themselves to my view with pallid and haggard countenances and sunken eyes, who are indebted solely to the abominable practice of masturbation for this wretched state of debility and exhaustion! Now disabled from rendering any service either to themselves or to their friends, they drag a life totally useless to others and a burden to themselves, in the midst of society in which they are despised. The moralist and the legislator, and, above all, the medical practitioner, would do well to direct their attention to this truly important subject, and to exert themselves in order to prevent such direful results; to the medical man, however, it more especially appertains to point out the sad effects of this most formidable scourge, as well as the means best adapted to prevent and relieve them.





The most experienced medical practitioners are of opinion, that the development of the nervous system, and the predominance of its action over the other parts of the organism, are the most influential causes of masturbation. I seldom see this habit indulged in by robust and vigorous persons, whose muscular and digestive organs are in full development; such persons feel more disposed to exercise their limbs, as well as their appetite for the pleasures of the table, in which their minds are too much engrossed to allow them to addict themselves to indulgence in other gratifications. This excessive development of nervous sensibility, which is the source frequently of so many praiseworthy actions, as well as of so many vicious enormities, and which, according to the direction it receives, gives rise to the most splendid or to the basest of results, may be derived either from natural disposition, or from early education. The infancy of man is remarkable for the predominance of the nervous over all the other systems of the body. In all young persons, the central parts of this system, as the brain and spinal cord, have attained an almost complete organization at a time when the locomotive organs and other parts of the machine are still in a state of relative imperfection. The organs of the senses, too, though unfit for use at birth, become rapidly developed, and soon arrive at a state of perfectly performing their functions. It is immediately after early infancy, at that epoch when the faculties of the new being commence to be developed with energy—that he runs the greatest dangers. If then an unfortunate accident, or, as too frequently happens, the indelicate touches of strange hands, disclose to the young subject what may at this time be considered a new sense, there takes place at this period towards the genital organs a greater or less concentration of the vital forces, and the patient, led on by the delusive pleasure, gives himself up with fury to a vice which is sure soon to destroy him, or draw down on him evils more terrible than death itself.





Children are, as one may say, superabundantly provided with sensibility, and it is on the direction given to this faculty that their future lot in life must depend. It sometimes happens that, by a natural bias of the system, the parts of generation, being very much developed and exquisitely sensible, soon become a centre of fluxion, towards which the vital forces become concentrated; they then mechanically and, as it were, imperceptibly draw the individual, so organized and so disposed by nature, to the commission of solitary acts, of the end or object of which he has not the slightest idea, and thus lead him, even in spite of himself, to the practice of self-pollution. Cases are on record where very young children have been known to apprise their friends of the sensations which they experienced, and to entreat them to adopt some means of preventing them from continually tormenting themselves; nay, I have read of several instances of children in the cradle who presented constant and violent erections, and who were thus forced to stimulate their genital organs still further by touching, suggested solely by instinct, by which they were kept in an almost permanent state of excitement. Now it is evident that the more nearly an individual will approach to this extreme state, in which the genital organs have got the start of the other parts of the system, the more forcibly will the causes which excite the sexual parts act on him, and occasion the melancholy effects which it is one of the objects of this treatise to pourtray.





It is, I am inclined to think, principally in large schools, where young persons of both sexes are assembled in great numbers, that the habit of self-pollution is most practised. Public education, I am willing to acknowledge, is one of the useful results of advanced civilization; but its most sanguine advocates must acknowledge that it is attended with very many serious disadvantages. It is extremely difficult, nay, almost impossible, to keep that strict watch over such large assemblages of children, which is requisite to prevent effectually that moral corruption of which I am now about to treat. Tissot relates the case of a public school in Switzerland, where all the pupils were accustomed to beguile the tedium and ennui occasioned by the narcotising lectures of one of the masters, by indulging in this detestable and disgusting practice.

Such are the principal circumstances which favour the depravation of morals and promote the practice of masturbation among boys.

Having now considered some of the most influential causes which lead to the practice of self-pollution, I next come to the consideration of the dismal effects which follow from its indulgence. The frightful effects occasioned, whether by excesses in coition, or by the baneful practice of masturbation, have been detailed in the writings of the most eminent medical men of all ages. They have all agreed in their description of the deplorable state into which these two causes are capable of throwing the strongest and most robust persons. According to them, continual excitation of the genital organs is capable of giving rise to almost all the acute or chronic diseases which can derange or disturb the harmony of our several functions; thus fevers of different characters, various organic changes, consumptions more or less rapid, affections of the nervous system of various kinds, have been found to be the more or less fatal consequences of these excesses, excesses which have been alike condemned by the moralist and medical man. The best writers, however, seem more intent on giving a list of the numerous diseases which masturbation may give rise to, than in showing satisfactorily how this cause is connected with the effects observed; thus, one writer tells us that after excessive indulgence in the act of generation the stomach becomes deranged, the entire body becomes debilitated, the individual so indulging becomes pale and emaciated, the eyes become hollow, &c. Another writer says that the too frequent emissions of semen produce a host of diseases,—as apoplexy,lethargy, epilepsy, tremors, paralysis, spasm, blindness, &c. Now it must be evident to any one, that the reading of such passages must leave in the mind a kind of vagueness and indecision, which will not allow it to place implicit confidence in the reality of the phenomena mentioned; and that not only the man of the world, who is unacquainted with medical subjects', but even the physician himself will find himself oftentimes unable to account for the production of such varied effects by one and the same cause. Such general assertions have another disadvantage, namely, that of causing the writers to be suspected of exaggeration; they consequently lessen the importance of their advice, and thus may lead young persons to despise a danger which they do not believe to exist. It is only after having examined the important part which the genital organs of both sexes perform in the animal economy, and after having studied the mode after which those causes act, which excite them, and the ordinary effects of their moderate action, that I shall be enabled to shew, from the laws of physiology, to what disastrous results their continual action may give rise. In these researches, my only guide shall be the attentive observation of facts; I shall endeavour to avoid those exaggerations which some writers indulge in; nature speaks with sufficient clearness on this matter—we disfigure the pictures which she presents to us by surcharging them, and so far from serving her cause, we weaken thereby the force of the lessons which she reads to us.





The organic apparatus, which constitutes in either sex the genital organs, is connected by the closest sympathy with the nervous system and the digestive organs; this close connexion was indispensable for the





regular performance of the generative functions; in fact, it is by making a greater or less impression on the organs of the senses, that the individuals of one sex act on those of the other, and excite in them those ardent desires, the object of which is coition. It is by means of the nervous sensibility thus exalted, that the generative organs are raised to that state of tension which renders them fit for executing their proper functions. The influence which the central parts of the nervous system exercise on the generative organs, and by which the latter are thrown into a greater or less state of violent orgasm, is found to possess a reflective power; the organs of generation, stimulated by the semen accumulated in their reservoirs, often throw the cerebral mass into a state of excitement, which deprives it of the power of acting freely, and renders the individual insensible to the voice of expiring reason. These two important parts of the organism—the brain and sexual organs—may be considered, in youth, as mutually reflecting the impressions which they receive, and as thus exciting each other in the most direct and powerful manner.

It is the attentive consideration of these numerous and exceedingly varied facts, which explains to us how the habitual exercise of the genital organs, either by coition or masturbation, may so far get the better of the will of the individual, as to force him to indulge in practices, the object of which is to gratify the venereal stimulus. In almost all such cases, the shameful act, when finished, is invariably followed by bitter regret; but according as the organs obtain repose, the resolutions which they had adopted of relinquishing the baneful practice, and which they thought nothing could shake, are soon forgotten.

The digestive organs are no less intimately connected with the generative organs, than the nervous system. It would obviously be impossible for the strongest person to supply the excessive waste of strength occasioned by the generative act, if the frame was not plentifullysupplied with the materials of reparation duly elaborated. One of the circumstances most favourable to the act of generation, is the moderate stimulation of the gastric system by good food and a small quantity of alcoholic drinks. It is in consequence of this sympathetic connexion between the digestive and reproductive apparatus, that the moderate exercise of the latter has the effect of arousing the functions of the stomach, and of rendering the appetite for food more keen, and the digestion more rapid. Young persons who addict themselves to excessive venery, or to the practice of masturbation, are very remarkable in this respect; they are often observed to be tormented by an almost insatiable desire of food, and eat every hour of the day, without their growth or increase making a progress at all proportioned to this excessive consumption of aliment. Soon, on the contrary, the paleness of their complexion, the debility and emaciation of their body, prove beyond all doubt that there exists in them an irritation, which turns off by another channel the materials of nutrition, and arrests the development and growth of the entire body.





These preliminary considerations obviously warrant us in drawing the conclusion, that it is to the nervous and digestive systems that excessive indulgence in the habit of self-pollution directs its chief influence. Experience fully proves that it is to the lesion of these two orders of organs that we are to refer most of the numerous diseases which are occasioned by this baneful habit, and pathology confirms the deductions drawn from physiological observation.

Persons who indulge in the habit of self-pollution frequently experience after each seminal discharge, or when the individual is too young, after the mere convulsion of the ejaculatory muscles, a marked sinking of the mental faculties; this debility is in several cases carried to such a degree, as to render the slightest mental attention impossible, and to force the individual to sink into profound sleep; this effect disappears after a very short time, and the cerebral functions are soon re-established; but according as the habit is of longer standing, a longer period of time is required before this restoration takes place, and eventually the entire faculty of thinking becomes completely and permanently destroyed. The other parts of the nervous system participate in this serious affection of the encephalon. The organs of the senses, and more especially of the sense of vision, invariably lose their sensibility, and





ultimately become incapable of discharging their functions.

In other individuals, the excessive exercise of the organs of generation, or their abuse, occasions mental alienation—either temporary or permanent; sometimes epilepsy is the result of this practice—this is evidently owing to the irritation of the nervous system, and there are few practitioners who have not observed cases where this affection has been produced, kept up, or aggravated by this destructive habit.

The immoderate excitation of the genital organs occasions in this part of the system a permanent irritation, which exercises on the principal viscera of digestion an influence similar to that which the other parts of the system exercise, though it be more rapid in its effects; thus, whilst the unfortunate victim, who addicts himself to the destructive habit of masturbation, loses at once both his physical and moral powers, the alimentary canal, being sympathetically irritated, seems at first to redouble its efforts, in order to repair the excessive waste which the machine suffers; but according as the genital excitation, having now become habitual, perpetuates and increases the evil, the functions of the digestive apparatus become disturbed; extreme sensibility of the stomach, and a diarrhoea which goes on gradually increasing, announce a secondary inflammation of this viscus. The powerful efforts which the stomach is obliged to make, in order to compensate the wear and tear occasioned by onanism, is an important cause which predisposes this organ to irritation, and favours the effect of that sympathy which unites it to the genital system. I remember the case of a young man who suffered severe attacks of colic almost invariably after excessive indulgence in coition, followed by profuse diarrhoea and intolerable tenesmus.

Such is the way in which the digestive organs are affected, in the great majority of cases, by frequent indulgence in the destructive habit of masturbation. In cases where there is great delicacy of the stomach and bowels, in addition to the influence directly made on the brain by the generative and digestive organs being in a state of irritation, there is experienced a feeling of general debility, arising from the inability of the stomach to discharge its functions. This combination of disagreeable sensations soon throws the victim into a state of profound melancholy, which it is extremely difficult to dissipate.





Besides the action which the generative organs, in a constant state of irritation by masturbation, exercise on the nervous and digestive systems, they act with still more energy on the organs of voice and of respiration; physiologists have almost invariably remarked the close sympathetic connexion which unites the vocal apparatus to that of generation; it is well known what remarkable modifications puberty causes in the strength and tone of the voice. There are few persons who have not remarked what great influence excessive indulgence in coition, and more especially in onanism, exercises on the development of the organ of voice and on the extent and variety of the sounds which it produces. Another observation which has been frequently made is, that persons who indulge in the habit of self-pollution are remarkable for the narrowness of their chest, and the great difficulty of breathing which they experience on making the slightest exertion; almost all these unfortunate individuals are very subject either to chronic catarrhs, or more serious affections of the lungs, and are eventually carried off by pulmonary consumption. It would be needless to cite here cases which have occurred in my own experience, in proof of this assertion; every medical practitioner must have met instances of the same. In some cases, also, palpitations and organic diseases of the heart and large vessels are the consequences of the destructive habit of masturbation.

Very slight attention to the phenomena which present themselves during the act of coition will enable us to account for such diseases being produced by excessive, and more especially by unnatural uses of the generative organs. During the extreme excitation of these organs which precedes and accompanies the emission of semen, the individual seems plunged into a paroxysm of epilepsy; the face becomes red, the breathing hurried, the limbs convulsed, and the person, totally absorbed by the intensity of his feelings, becomes quite insensible to every other object. Now, during such efforts the blood becomes accumulated in the chest and the heart, whose action being now re-doubled, drives it forcibly through the lungs or towards the head, which then becomes violently congested, a state which has been more than once known to terminate in fatal apoplexy. In this way I can readily account for those sudden deaths, which occur either immediately after coition, or when coition is indulged in after a hearty meal. Now, during the powerful efforts which the heart makes in order to free itself from the great quantity of blood with which it is now oppressed, its hurried and precipitate action may give rise either to palpitation, more or less violent, or its cavities may acquire that organic disposition which eventually ends in aneurism. It is then, also, that the lungs, by acting violently on the excessive quantity of blood which is sent to them, appear to contract those primary irritations, which being constantly augmented by the repetition of the same acts, will soon give rise to all the phenomena of pulmonary consumption. I remember the case of a patient, who, during the act of coition, was suddenly seized with so violent a palpitation, that he would have expired, had he not stopped suddenly. Another case is mentioned of a man, who, having married a second time at rather an advanced age, suffered, when consummating his marriage, so distressing a sense of suffocation, that he was obliged to suspend his efforts for the time; he experienced the same feeling whenever he approached his wife, and was thus completely prevented from satisfying his desires. To remedy this, he consulted several medical men, but without success; at last he applied to a quack, who confidently undertook his cure. After having kept him under treatment for some time, he assured him that he was quite cured, and recommended him to persevere in the effort; he followed the advice ot his worthy doctor, and expired in the act.





Marriage was instituted by the divine Creator in the time of man's primitive innocence, as the means of his happiness, and for the perpetuation of his race. The wisdom of its institution has been felt and acknowledged in every age; but before undertaking that important and prudent step, I would suggest the necessity of the patient first thoroughly convincing himself of his perfect recovery, and of obtaining the sanction of his medical attendant, ere he embark his happiness, and that of a being who ought to be most dear to him, by a process which he cannot afterwards honourably annul, and which, unless he be thoroughly restored, will entail physical deformity and mental misery on the innocent and helpless.





I have often been asked to state my opinion respecting the frequency with which the repetition of sexual excitement may take place, without the production, immediate or remote, of any injury to the general constitution. As very few individuals govern themselves, particularly in early life, by rules of caution on this interesting point, unless physical necessity binds them to it, we shall merely state that the rites of Venus should be circumscribed within the limits of temperance, and that no unnecessary stimuli should be used to excite this natural function into action; for copulation with men, like menstruation with women, terminates in many diseases: much must depend on the natural powers of the constitution, and the peculiar frame of the individual's susceptibility to animal excitement, as well as the care displayed towards the individual during the period of his growth; and many subsidiary circumstances, both of a general, local, and mental character, with certain limitations, are to be considered; for with some, chastity has no virtue.

I am acquainted with no function of the animal mechanism so specially dependent upon the mind as this: for though sexual intercourse is a compound act of the body and the mind, its essential energy, its peculiar stimuli, proceed from the mind; and according to the exciting energy of the mind is the act performed. Thus, from a compound act of indescribable pleasure and languor, organic beings are endowed with power to produce others similar to themselves; or rather, an essential part of themselves is separated in the act, the power of that separation being concentrated in the generative organs. The moment the semen has passed, from the greater exertion used by the male, languor and depression succeed; and at this period his office is complete, and a new and complicated arrangement takes place in the female: but what is the character of that arrangement which actually takes places within the female uterus, when, after experiencing the most delightful and exquisite of all sensual pleasure, being properly impregnated, and on the eve of giving form and existence to her offspring, we know not.





From this it evidently appears, that the semen is of the first importance to the animal economy; that if it is repeatedly excited to emission by an unnatural stimulus, the parts become feeble; and if carried to a very great excess, it causes impotence, by rendering the semen so thin, as even to stain the linen of a yellow colour. Such semen has not had due time to concoct, and is emitted without desire or ability; in some cases the secretion takes place so quickly, that the least friction on the glans has produced its emission, even the act of walking or riding fast. Yet here we would have it distinctly understood, that all organs are strengthened and improved by a proper and natural exercise of their functions; and at the end of a certain period, they perform with ease those actions which at first were difficult to them.

Respecting the act itself, it is ever to be considered of service to the full grown individual, and is justly ranked among the necessary evacuations; for, modified agreeably to the mechanism of the various and complicated circumvolutions of the vessels through which it has to pass, it obeys an analogous law to that which regulates the discharges, and, in a given proportion, its preternatural retention of emission exhibits similar symptoms of derangement; thus a too great and continued evacuation of this elaborate fluid not only impairs its particular organs, but immediately or remotely affects the whole system, producing tremor, relaxation, dejection, &c.; whilst, by its long retention, it not only diminishes the actual energies of youthful passions in the attitude of their meridian vigour, but finally produces a reluctance to the sublime and more fascinating blandishments of sexual bliss, and with a cachectic habit of body and morosity of disposition; for by long retention of the semen, it not only loses its stimulating character, but even the spermatic vessels close for want of the active blood to distend and to stimulate them into action.

Another and equally greatconsolation to the afflicted, is, that when the diseases resulting from pollution and excess have been cured, the functions of generation are restored, and the previously unhappy victim of folly is placed in a condition to acquit himself properly of his duties as a husband, and ultimately as a parent.





In addition to the diseases already mentioned, as resulting from onanism and excessive venereal indulgence—namely, apoplexy, heart disease, and pulmonary consumption, I may also state that scrofula, rickets, caries of the vertebra, and spontaneous luxations of the thigh bone, are frequent consequences of this abuse. If so many diseases are occasioned by this pernicious habit, how many other affections which are not originally caused by it, are modified in their form, aggravated in their symptoms, and rendered obstinate and incurable by it? More than once has it been my lot, after endeavouring in vain to account for the strange and unusual symptoms which certain diseases presented, as also the obstinacy with which they resisted all means of cure, to discover at length that masturbation it was which originally caused them and which now kept them up, and to see them gradually yield to proper treatment as soon as this destructive habit was discontinued. I know at this moment the case of a person affected with melancholy, whose mental disease has been repeatedly brought back by self-pollution at the time .when his medical attendant thought him perfectly restored.

The frequent exercise of the genital organs occasions also important changes in their structure and sensibility. Thus, children who addict themselves to selfpollution are remarkable for the premature development of the external organs of generation. In young boys the penis and scrotum are much larger than one would expect from the age of the individual; whilst in young females the labia are longer, and the vulva larger than ordinary. In both sexes, however, these organs, though thus increased in size, are also softer and more flabby than natural, and their erection is slower and less complete. Self-pollution has also the effect of hastening the period of puberty in both sexes. Thus, we sometimes see boys, from 11 to 13 years of age, having the pubis covered with down, and whose testicles secrete a limpid and imperfect kind of semen; I make the





remark, as I consider it of great importance in a practical point of view, inasmuch as in a case where the state of a patient's health causes me to suspect him or her of indulging in masturbation, the appearance and size of the parts of generation, may in many cases change our suspicions into certainty, and indicate that mode of treatment calculated to remedy the bad effects of this habit.

The serious lesions of the most important organs of the system occasion, as I have seen, different acute or chronic diseases, the proximate cause of which lies in some lesion either of the nervous system, or of the organs subservient to respiration and circulation, or of the different parts of the digestive apparatus; but acute affections of these organs are not the most frequent consequences of masturbation; and even the chronic diseases occasioned by it constitute but the last term of the career, already rendered sufficiently trying by the train of evils which accompany it; thus I have frequently found the great exhaustion of the nervous system, produced by masturbation, occasion considerable injury to the faculty of memory, and sometimes its complete ruin. The other faculties of the mind are also impaired by this habit. Our lunatic asylums afford many instances of insanity being produced by this destructive practice. "Esquirol" remarks that this effect is more frequently occasioned in men than in women: he states, that out of twenty-three individuals deprived of reason by this cause, there were but three women. Dr. Falret mentions that debility of intellect, and especially of the memory, more especially characterises the mental alienation of masturbators; others have observed that dementia, melancholy, or a disposition to suicide, are the more usual results of masturbation; and also, that it is one of the causes of that fatal paralysis which so frequently complicates these affections.

"The muscular debility produced by this ruinous habit is not the least striking among its results; nothing is more common in large cities than to meet young persons who walk with the trunk bent and tottering, incapable of supporting the least fatigue, presenting many of the characters of senile decay with the habits and pretensions of youth. The sunk, hollow and dull eye, the sharpened features and wrinkled forehead, the bony and fleshless trunk, are all signs of radical sinking of their physical constitution and of their intellectual faculties; it is then those profound states of melancholy become developed in those who remember what they have been, and see what they must come to; and that invincible distaste for all the enjoyments of life, which too often terminates in suicide. It is under these circumstances that those hypochondriacal affections appear, which drive their victims from society, and subject them to evils which their exquisite sensibility renders very distressing, but which all the rest of the world look on as merely imaginary. It is at this period, and after having suffered a longer or shorter time, according to the vigour of the constitution, that chronic gastritis and enteritis become developed, or that disorganizing inflammation of the lungs, occasioned by those mischievous excesses, terminates the deplorable existence of the miserable victims of masturbation."





If we compare the injurious effects of excessive indulgence in coition and those of masturbation, we shall find that the causes which combine to render excess in the former dangerous, act with much more energy in the second, and that several circumstances peculiar to the latter render the results of its frequent repetition more serious. It is well known that the man who addicts himself to the solitary and debasing practice of onanism is kept for a considerable time in a state of general and permanent rigidity of the entire body; this state of tension is sometimes carried so far, that very painful cramps are occasioned by it, and the fatigue which results from it obliges the individual to relax his efforts occasionally to take rest. It is sufficient to observe the circumstances which accompany masturbation, to see that the nervous system must be directly affected by it, not only from the violent and continued contractions which it occasions throughout the entire muscular system, but also by the prodigious tension of the imagination, which is in those cases wound up to its highest state, in order to represent to the devoted votaries of self-pollution the fantastical objects of their disgusting transports. Another cause which renders onanism more dangerous than excessive indulgence in coition, arises from the circumstance, that it is much easier to addict one's self to the one than to abuse the other; for when a man gives himself up without restraint to the natural pleasures of love, the fatigue felt as well by himself as by his companion, will have the effect of preventing his exhaustion; whilst on the other hand there is no bridle, no restraint on him who practises selfabuse: the former is ordinarily obliged to wait for a favourable moment to indulge in his excesses—every moment answers the purpose of the other—all he requires is mere solitude to procure his baneful gratifications: he constantly carries about him the sting which torments him; he alternately finds his imagination exciting his organs, and his organs inflaming his imagination; whilst the other, aroused only by persons of the other sex, can find an easy remedy in the absence of such. There is nothing to distract or take up the attention of the individual who addicts himself to onanism, whilst a thousand circumstances are constantly distracting the attention of the man who is disposed for the enjoyment of a female.





However, the relative dangers of masturbation arise less from the few obstacles which lie in its way, and the state of exaltation which accompanies it, than from the period of life when persons addict themselves to it. The various difficulties and impediments which prevent copulation before a certain age, do not exist in the case of onanism; thus, we sometimes meet it in very young children. Full grown boys addict themselves to the practice with the greatest passion. Now, let us but reflect on the consequences of such an abuse. The generative propensity, which under normal and natural circumstances does not show itself until the physical development of the organs is completed or at least considerably advanced, and until their condition has assumed that special character called temperament, which moreover waits until it can be legitimately gratified, and without any consequent danger; this propensity being called forth prematurely, steps in amidst all the natural efforts of growth with its unnatural train of moral excitations, sensual shocks and physical pollutions. A system of organs which should not have been called to the performance of its functions till a later period is thrown violently among others, whose development should naturally precede its own : it comes in to demand a portion of that strength and substance which was not intended for it, and thus to create by its influence a source of disturbance in addition to those numerous ones which beset the period of growth.





The details now given of the effects of masturbation hold true, I admit, only when this habit has commenced at a very early period, and is frequently indulged in. These effects are of course less striking and are considerably modified, when the habit is less frequently resorted to. Still, under the most favourable circumstances, the invariable effects of masturbation is emaciation. Less marked in those, whose habits are otherwise good, whose constitution is lymphatic, and more especially in those who abuse themselves with moderation, it often proceeds in others to the most hideous marasmus. Debility keeps pace with the emaciation j at first it is felt only after indulgence in the act; but it gradually becomes more marked and more prolonged; then the individual becomes listless and indolent, indifferent to all attractions and amusement, panting and fatigued on making the slightest exertion. The paleness of the face, the purple tint of the eye-lids, the weakness of the pulse, and of all the organic movements in general, prove that the muscular system is not the only system affected; the powers of the heart and lungs also participate in the general exhausted state of the masturbator's system. At the same time that the unhappy victim of onanism loses flesh and becomes exhausted in strength, his nervous sensibility increases more and more,—he becomes every day more sensible to external influences,—he is startled by the slightest cause; with him everything —atmospheric variations, drinking, eating, and, still more, the venereal act itself, is the source of divers sensations, annoyances and feelings of various kinds. He constantly complains of palpitations of the heart, oppression of breathing, dizziness, head-ache, pains and a sense of creeping along the vertebral column, numbness, cramps, a sense of lassitude, tremors, wandering pains through the limbs, and a relaxation of the penis and scrotum, as shewn in the Engravings, Plates 6 and 7





In such persons, the ordinary diseases, when they occur, soon put on a serious and alarming aspect, and present a series of symptoms of a very unusual character. This excessive susceptibility of the system remains with them frequently, even after they have abandoned the practice of onanism; it is often observed to attach itself to them for the remainder of their existence, and to prove the torment of their after-life. Epilepsy, hysteria, hypochondriasis, chorea, and the other formidable host of nervous disorders are likely to develop themselves much more readily in such persons. Thus, all authors who have written on these diseases are agreed in setting down masturbation among their most frequent causes, and here it would not be out of place to dissect the various effects of this deplorable habit, so ably illustrated by M. Lallemand, one of the most distinguished authorities on these diseases. He observes :—

"The effects of nocturnal pollutions are generally supposed to be proportioned to their abundance, frequency, and energy of the phenomena that precede and accompany them. This conclusion, however, is very false; for it is generally when the emissions become less frequent and less abundant, that they are followed by serious and protracted general symptoms. This anomaly, however, is more apparent than real, for the nocturnal now become conjoined with diurnal pollutions, which latter likewise escape without any sensation, passing off with the urine, or when the patient is at stool, without either his knowledge or observation. It is of importance, therefore, to warn both surgeons and patients of the errors which they are daily committing, in estimating the importance of these nocturnal pollutions only by their abundance and frequency.

"When seminal discharges occur during the voiding the urine, or during a stool, the most serious and dangerous consequences may ultimately ensue, in consequence of their frequent repetition. Such patients ultimately become seriously ill; and Lallemand, whose observations I have always found accurate and faithful, says:—" These patients soon become ill, their most intimate friends are ignorant of the cause of the various disorders they complain of, the medical man who possesses their confidence, is not better informed, for even the patients entertain no suspicion of the real nature of their complaint. Hence their indisposition is set down to ennui, tendency to melancholy, or to hypochondriasis. When their disease assumes a more serious aspect, then the constitution is said to be delicate, impressionable, or unhealthy; and they are looked upon as malades imaginaires. They are reproached with too much care of themselves, or an over-fondness for medicine. Medical men in extensive practice, tire of hearing the tale of so long a series of unintelligible and inexplicable maladies, and rid themselves of such patients, by recommending them to travel, or a change of air. Officious friends advise marriage, or some sort of occupation to fill up the void in their existence; but all blame them, because none really comprehends the nature of their disorder. Unfit for any serious occupation, and incapable of deep reflection, they become dissatisfied with themselves, and still more so with others. Absorbed in one sole tLought, they return incessantly to themselves to seek for the cause of their lamentable condition, and soon become misanthropical."





. Lallemand details two cases, the subjects of which purposely studied medicine, the one during ten, the other fifteen years, without interruption, and with the view of learning their nature of the malady ; but at the expiration of that time, they did not even suspect the cause of their suffering. We may judge from this of the numbers suffering from diurnal pollution, which escapes detection. Lallemand mentions several very remarkable instances; the two following highly interesting examples I shall transcribe from his work:—

Case—Of a military officer, who abandoned the profession of arms, to seek in the study of medicine the nature of the disease with which he was afflicted. Copied from Lallemand's valuable work :—entitled " Des Pertes Seminales Inwlontaire, par M. Lallemand, Professeur de la Faculte de Medicine de Montpellier. Paris, 1836."





"I was born very weak, with inguinal hernia: I have been subject from infancy to a purulent discharge from the ears, very copious and tenacious, from the left ear especially. Strengthened my constitution by habitual exercise in the country, substantial diet, and river bathing, and at thirteen I was as robust as any of my companions.

"At this period, a lascivious but circumspect young girl excited premature erections up to the moment in which emission excited her apprehensions. This precocious excitement stimulated me to masturbation. At sixteen years of age I contracted a blenorrhagia (gonorrhoea), which I carefully concealed, and which disappeared slowly under the use of cold drinks, baths, and strict attention to diet, and avoiding stimulants. The discharge returned twice the same year after excess in new beer, since then it has frequently re-appeared after long walking, riding, or exposure to cold. At eighteen I obtained a rendezvous with a woman whom I liked very much; but I experienced so much agitation that I could not profit by it. I attributed this to the excess of my passion; the failure produced deep grief and great distrust of myself. The following year, I was more fortunate with another female; but I paid dearly for the excess I committed that night: the next day the discharge re-appeared more profusely, and there came on severe inflammation with swelling of the testicles; the right epididymis remained engorged for five or six months.

"From that time my health gradually failed; I suffered from jaundice, febrile accessions, wandering pains all over the body, and disorder of the stomach; I became extremely sensible to cold, to heat, moisture, and to every sudden atmospheric change. The alteration in my health induced me to give up the military profession, and apply myself to medicine to find out the cause of my suffering.

"When arrived in Paris, I found the humid moisture of the streets and of the dissecting rooms readily brought on my gleet; and sitting for a long time produced a sense of weight and heat in the perineum, with lancinating pains.





"These increased to such an extent, as to induce me to believe that I had a stone in the bladder; I felt constant pain in the fossa navicularis; I passed water very frequently and with pain; the last drops of urine were thready, glairy, producing in the neck of the bladder the feeling of a red-hot iron. I had determined upon an operation; but Professor Boyer before sounding, prescribed baths, which assuaged the irritation. The vacation arrived, and exercise in the open air removed all these symptoms.

"The following year I worked night and day, preparing for a concours; my digestion became deranged; diarrhoea, with straining at stool, came on. On going to stool, I often passed sperm in abundance. I wished to continue to give this the attention it deserved: so much occupied 1 felt stupid; tinkling in the ears came on; I understood nothing; I was obliged to renounce every occupation. I apprehended that every moment I should be seized with a. fit of apoplexy.

"The third year I suffered from palpitations, which made me fear aneurism of the heart; at a later period I felt pains in the chest, constant cough, and I persuaded myself that I was consumptive. At last, ftfter my reception, I set out for home, emaciated, jaundiced, and very melancholy. The motion of the carriage brought back my gleet.

"A little time after my arrival I contracted a venereal disorder, which I treated with mercury. This ruined my health, and I discontinued it so soon as the external symptoms had disappeared. I then got a chronic gastritis, attended with obstinate constipation and deep hypochondriasis.

"I was tormented with flatulency. The stomach and abdomen were distended beyond measure with wind. I felt as if a hand of iron produced a kind of internal grasping, which closed up every passage. The descent of the diaphragm was prevented by the violent pain, and distension of the belly. I felt as if I should choke; my face became purple, copious sweat came all over the body, at last that kind of constriction ceased, and I was relieved; but for several days I felt fatigue, and my skin assumed a jaundiced tint.





"During two years I combatted this chronic gastritis by leeches, baths, lavements, and the strictest vegetable diet. I lived also for eight months upon milk; but all without any success. I felt a constant desire to eat, and as soon as I took a little substantial food, I was overwhelmed by the labour of digestion.

"At length I observed that I passed sperm during the violent efforts excited by constipation, and I was soon satisfied I likewise lost it in making water.

"It was then only that I comprehended the cause of all my suffering. I obtained Sainte Marie's translation of Wickmann, I devoured it with eagerness, I learnt it by heart, I thought myself saved; but was doomed to disappointment.

"River baths, cold lotions to the perineum, produced an unfortunate impression upon the bladder and the vesiculse seminales. When I entered into the water, I felt a spasmodic contraction of these reservoirs, and the urine that I was obliged to pass contained an abundant flocculent cloud, owing to the presence of a large quantity of semen. The cold lotions produced only a momentary effect.

"The cold clysters excited in the rectum an intolerable tenesmus, attended with pain and weight; they facilitated the expulsion of fcecal matters, by provoking contractions of the rectum; but these spasmodic contractions were soon followed by those of the vesiculas seminales, and a copious discharge of semen. I cannot adequately express how much injury I sustained from these cold lavements.

"Ice, which I took internally, gave me tone for some time; it stopped the constipation, and excited energetic erections; but it soon brought on inflammation of the bladder and prostate, which disclosed itself by a painful sensation of weight at the side of the rectum, and lancinating pains behind the pubes; a frequent and irresistible desire to pass water, and a copious, abundant, glairy, puriform deposit which adhered strongly to the bottom of the vessel. The application of ice to the perineum and loins had the same effect.

"Quina, spa-water, and tonics produced good effects c





for a day or two, but they soon increased the irritation of the bladder and canal, they brought back the constipation.

"Attributing to the pressure of the faecal matters the seminal discharges which took place on going to stool, I resolved to apply the practice of Professor Boyer for fissures of the anus. I, myself, cut before a glass the spincters with a lithotome, which I had constructed expressly for the purpose, the expulsion of the faeces became more easy; but the seminal losses were not diminished.

"I applied cauteries to the loins and perineum to relieve the fixed pain at the neck of the bladder. I tried urtication, and even a capuncture to stop the spasmodic contractions of the vesiculse seminales, which I felt very distinctly, especially when I sat down; they caused despondency because they warned me of an inevitable pollution. These different means succeeded for some time, but their effects were never lasting. I often took lavements with decoction of poppy heads to ease the irritation of the genital organs, and procure me a little repose.

"Nothing can explain the anxiety and despair these long nights without sleep caused me. The most frightful dreams, the most dismal ideas continually led me to think of suicide. It was always with terror that I saw the moment of going to bed arrive, and I waited the arrival of day as a blessing. It was particularly against this punishment that I employed narcotic lavements, but they increased the sluggishness of the rectum and the relaxation of the genital organs. Besides they excited violent pains in the head, and disturbed the digestive functions. They increased the habitual somnolency which tormented me during the day, and which rendered me incapable of any serious occupation. It was in this state of complete nonentity, under all these circumstances, that I arrived at Montpellier, completely disgusted with life.

"My health from this time, under your guidance and treatment, became perfectly re-established, and is now more firm than it ever has been. I can endure under these circumstances what I could not have borne at twenty years of age, the erections are more vigorous, and the ejaculation not so precipitate; it is accompanied by





sensations, the vivacity of which were unknown to me. My intellectual functions have acquired a new vigour; if they had been in as good a state when I found myself in such a melancholy condition, my career probably would not have been so unfortunate. At all events, I am thankful that I am delivered from the frightful malady, which for twenty-one years poisoned and embittered my existence."

Lallemand also relates the following remarkable case, which I cannot refrain from inserting :—

Case.—" M. K., a Pole, the lymphatic temperament very well characterised, born with inguinal hernia of the left side, which was cured by the application of bandages. A wasting of the corresponding testicle was the consequence that followed. At seventeen he addicted himself to masturbation almost every day; and sometimes twice or thrice. At twenty he suffered from weakness of the limbs, accompanied with trembling, pains in the knees, loins, &c.

'' One day being rather late in setting out for his college, and fearing a severe reprimand, he began to run, but he was soon obliged to stop, experiencing all the sensations which ejaculations produce. It took place, in fact, although the penis was not in a state of erection; he felt at this moment a kind of fainting, which forced him to support himself against a wall till the seminal emission was completed, which was very copious. The same took place twice afterwards, and was always induced by fear. The patient thinks, that from this period he had daily pollutions, although he did not perceive them until he had been examined upon the subject. And I believe he is not deceived, for although he had abandoned his habits, he experienced from that time pains and oppression of the chest, which gave him the appearance of a person being in a consumption. His health declined more and more, and to investigate the cause, he com* menced the study of medicine.

"The following year the Polish revolution broke out, he joined the army, and during the campaign he had frightful nocturnal pollutions. The stream of urine weak, the last drops were thick, and remained a long time in .the urethra. He lost all venereal desire, and was left completely impotent. He arrived in France at twentythree years of age; digestion deranged, which he attributed to the use of wine; his disease was considered to be chronic inflammation of the stomach. It was treated by leeches, cataplasms, &c.; the following year his gait became tottering, in consequence of the extreme weakness of the lower extremities, especially in the left side. Blisters to the limb and to the left hip, frictions, &c, were ordered, but increased all the symptoms. In December, 1836, I saw him at the age of twenty-seven; cessation of nocturnal pollutions for two years, excessive emaciation, general prostration, loss of appetite, digestion slow and laborious, and attended with flatulency, purple appearance of the face, stupidity, faintings, disorder and confusion of the head, loss of memory; obstinate constipation lasting for five or six days; seminal discharges during the efforts at stool; sleep very short, fatiguing rather than refreshing; ringing in the ears; wandering pains causing watchfulness, and compelling the patient to walk about the greater part of the night. Burning pain in the head, with coldness in the lower limbs; considerable diminution in the intellectual functions; loss of memory, extreme peevishness; he could not remember old associations, even old friends, companions of his exile; desire for solitude; excessive timidity, and yet a desire for a duel, in the hope of being killed. Flacidity of the genitals; complete absence of the venereal appetite, and of erections; excessive sensibility of theurethra on the contact of the sound; urine disturbed, flocculent, containing a deposit similar to that of a strong decoction of barley. The patient's own statement:—' Urine copious, I am compelled to pass it very often, the last drops thready and viscous. The jet is not continuous, is stopped from time to time by spasmodic contractions of the urethra, so that I am obliged to stop myself each time, before beginning again to pass urine. The orifice is always moist and red. I experienced the last fortnight a sensation as if I was passing seminal fluid, I find, from time to time, slight spasmodic movements which must result from contractions of the vesiculce seminales, for on examining the penis a few moments after, I always found the urethra filled with a copious viscous moisture. This sensation is felt especially when I am seated.





"' Latterly, on passing my fifth examination, I finished my paper, when I heard the hour strike, which announced to me that I must send in my copy. The mere thought that I was behind-hand, produced immediately a very copious pollution, accompanied with a voluptuous feeling, but no erection.





"'After some days of examination, on the 10th of December, 1836, I cauterized from the neck of the bladder to the bulb of the urethra.' The following is the patient's account of the consequences of the cauterization :—

"'To begin, from the 20th of December up to this day, the 6th of January, I perceived in the whole of my economy, an improvement daily, and in a marked degree. The urine always limpid. The first benefit of the cauterization was the cessation of the frequent desire to pass urine; afterwards the digestion improved. At present I can eat of everything indiscriminately, and I feel no longer weight or pain in the stomach. The epigastrium is no longer painful on pressure. I feel no longer in the belly that fermentation that attended digestion, and tormented me, especially at night. In fine, the symptoms of chronic gastritis have entirely disappeared, constipation has in like manner ceased. The erections are restored, they are complete and lasting. I have had three nocturnal pollutions since the cauterization; the first the tenth day, the latter yesterday, the twenty-fifth day; all energetic with a lively feeling of pleasure, and I am much astonished to find that they have in no respect weakened me."

M. Lallemand states that he has frequently seen M. K. since he sent him this account; his voice has recovered all its clearness, his muscular strength has been restored; and with his friends he laughs at his previous misanthropy.

The baneful effects of this practice are assented to by the oldest writers: Celsus says of it, in his work On the Preservation of Health, "These habits are always hurtful to weak people, and the frequent indulgence in them weakens those of the strongest constitution." Aetius gives the following description of its destructive consequences :—" Young people have the air and appearance of old age; they become pale, effeminate, lazy, benumbed, stupid and imbecile; they have a total distaste for everything, are totally incapacitated, and may even become paralytic. Hoffman says :—" After frequent nocturnal pollutions, not only the powers are lost, the body falls away, and the face turns pale, but, moreover, the memory fails; a cold sensation seizes all the limbs, the sight is clouded, and the voice becomes hoarse; all the body languishes by degrees, disturbing dreams prevent the relief which sleep should bring." To conclude my observations on the dismal effects of this pernicious habit, I can look on them in no other light than as a scourge from the immediate hand of the great omnipotent himself, vindicating the gross and unnatural violation of his established laws. The drivelling maniac, whose mental alienation was originally occasioned by this habit (and the statistics of our lunatic asylums prove that three-fourths of the inmates of these abodes were reduced to that state by self-pollution),— the pining and emaciated youth, hurried with accelerated speed to a premature grave,—the haggard and lack-lustre eye of the impotent victim, the pallor of whose cheek is relieved only by the self-convicting flush of conscious guilt, or the hectic flush of pulmonary consumption, fully warrant me in drawing this conclusion.





ADDITIONAL REMARKS OF THE EFFECTS OF SELF-ABUSE ON THE SENSES.

As one of the principal objects which the author of this work had in view was to deter the youth of the rising generation from the baneful habit of self-abuse, and as he feels satisfied that the most effectual mode of doing this, is by pointing out in detail the direful consequences sure to be brought on all who practise it, he deems it expedient in the present edition to give an additional chapter on this very important subject. The effects of self-abuse may be divided into physical and moral; by physical I mean such effects as are to be recognised in the various organs and parts of the body, and in their several functions, such as the Taste, Smell, Hearing and Sight, whilst, by moral effects, I intend those which manifest themselves in the intellectual facul





ties.—As the physical effects On The Senses are first observed, I shall first treat of them; these effects may be thus enumerated:—

Taste.—The changes experienced by these patients in the organs of taste, correspond with those that are going on in the digestive organs. In some the appetite is disordered from the first, and when the disease has made considerable progress, the mouth is often clammy with a bitter, salt, or earthy taste. Food and drink appear less sapid, and do not give any agreeable sensation. Under these circumstances, the patients generally restrict themselves spontaneously to a vegetable diet, or even to milk.

Smell.—I have paid little attention to the alterations of this function in these patients; but I have heard many complain of a notable change in their power of appreciating odours, and even of an entire loss of the sense of smell.

Hearitvj.—The sense of hearing suffers more changes than the preceding. In general, like the others, it loses its acuteness, and this loss sometimes approaches a state of deafness. These symptoms vary too, according to the individuals affected, and the different degrees and oscillations of the disease, and even sometimes from day to day, without appreciable cause.

Another annoyance felt by such patients results from the different noises they have in their ears. In some there is a constant whistling; in others, a sullen rumbling, like the distant roll of the drum; in others again, the noise resembles that of a waterfall, mill, &c. Some patients hear many of these noises at the same time.

Sight.—The first change produced by involuntary seminal discharges, is a diminished brilliancy of the eyes. These organs soon lose their brilliant, piercing expression, and appear dull, although they may not yet be either sunken or surrounded by dark circles. There is always more or less marked dilatation of the pupils under these circumstances, and this probably conduces to give the eyes their singular appearance.

To the want of expression, there is also joined a timidity or appearance of shame, especially in such as practice masturbation. Their eyes never meet those of another with confidence; they are turned away hastily. and after wandering about, are at length directed to the ground. There is in this uncertainty of the organs of vision, something analogous to the trembling of the voice, hesitation of speech, stuttering produced by emotion, and instability of the lower extremities, habitual agitation of the hands, palpitations, &c.—all common symptoms in these cases. Importance attaches to these circumstances, because we frequently meet with patients who wish to conceal bad habits, besides which, most of those who suffer from diurnal pollutions are not aware of their existence, and hence arises a category of diseases, emanating from self-pollution, which I shall enumerate in the following manner.





Dyspepsia (primary and secondary).—Wasting Of The Flesh with great exhaustion, debility, &c.

Diseases of the nervous system, as Apoplexy.—EpiLepsy.—Paralysis.—Tremoes of the limbs.—SpasMomc Diseases.—Amaurosis, or loss of sight.—And more especially Nyctalopia, or night-blindness.—DiaBetes Mellitus.—Hemoptysis.—Pulmonary ConSumption. — Seminal Discharges. — Impotence. — Sterility.—Premature Senility.

Such are the most prominent effects to which selfabuse and venereal excesses may give rise. I feel, however, called on to state, that there is not a disease in the whole circle of nosology, whether of a structural, or functional nature, which may not be called into existence by indulgence in these practices. In enumerating the moral effects resulting from self-abuse and venereal excess, I feel myself warranted in stating summarily that there is not an intellectual faculty with which the beneficent Creator has blessed us that is not liable to be impaired by these causes. The mental faculty observed to suffer first, however, is that of MeMory.—Then we have Inability To Concentrate Ideas.—Reasoning Power impaired.—Hence, Mania —Idiotoy.

If this enumeration, scanty as it may appear, is not yet enough to deter the most extravagant slave to such pernicious habits, I know not what will serve. Let him only for a moment consider that it is by the possession of these faculties in the perfection in which they are given to us, that man is so pre-eminently distin





guished above the brute creation. I shall now endeavour to trace the relation of cause and effect between these destructive habits and the several diseases ascribed to them as to their origin.

Dyspepsia.—In the first place, the sciences of anatomy and physiology show that the parts concerned in the performance of the generative functions, are closely connected with the important function of digestion. The function of digestion is of course dependent on nervous influence, and anything like deviation from this unconscious act is one of those sorrows to which the unfortunate sensualist is devoted. Nature avenges herself on all who outrage her wise laws. The change which should take place in converting the food into nutritive matter, is entirely dependent on nervous influence, and accordingly whatever interferes with the regular distribution of this influence, must more or less interfere with this important and truly vital function.

The sympathy subsisting between the brain and stomach with respect to the effects produced by self-pollution and inordinate venery is well known. The stomach however appears to be the organ which suffers first. The reason usually assigned for this is, that the stomach is the part of the system whose functions require the greatest perfection in the organ; hence it is that the moment any cause whatever impairs its strength, its functions are immediately deranged; hence imperfect digestion, assimilation and nutrition; and hence, the aliment, not having undergone the necessary elaboration, cannot recruit the patient's strength, already exhausted by the unnatural and inordinate expenditure of the seminal fluid. Hence the unfortunate victim of sensualism loses flesh rapidly; he becomes emaciated, and soon falls into a state of complete marasmus: to this debility of the digestive organ is soon added marked debility of the brain also.

After this, and as a consequence, the organs of the senses become deteriorated, and leave to the mind only a very imperfect exercise of its faculties:—the faculties of the memory and imagination become obliterated, and there soon remains nothing more than the mere skeleton of a man, a frightful picture of human degradation. This last mentioned state is owing to the c 5





exhausted condition of the nervous system, arising principally from the effects produced on the brain, on which all the functions of the mind obviously depend. The seminal fluid which according to some writers bears a close analogy to the animal spirits, cannot be discharged in too great quantity without producing a state of debility which must necessarily diminish the energies of the nervous system, the principal constituent of the seminal fluid being that which calls forth nervous action.

Apoplexy.—The occurrence of apoplexy as a result either of self-abuse, or, as perhaps is more common, of inordinate venery, is a matter of history. And indeed very slight attention will enable us readily to account for this effect. In coition, the action of the heart being much increased, the blood is driven with more than ordinary violence to the brain; when this occurs very frequently, the delicate structure of this organ at length gives way, and the unfortunate victim of sensuality is either carried off suddenly, or, if spared, he drags out for the remainder of his days a miserable existence with palsied limbs and impaired intellect.

To persons advanced in years more especially, I would recommend to be most abstemious in these indulgences. More than once has it happened that the aged bridegroom has found death in the very arms where he was led by his delusive and fatal desires to seek for pleasure.

Epilepsy.—The occurrence of epilepsy, in persons addicted to self-abuse, is a thing of which I have had abundant proof since the first edition of this book. That such a disease should result from frequent indulgence in this habit need not surprise any one who will but recollect the convulsive state into which the entire body is thrown after the act of self-pollution. The outrageous aggressions committed on the nervous system, by repeated indulgence of this kind, cannot fail to reduce this important system to the lowest degree to debility, and so to render the unhappy sensualist susceptible of the slightest disturbing impressions.

The close connexion between the genital organs and the nervous centres are so striking, that one might almost infer d priori, if such were allowable in medical science, that excessive indulgence was perfectly adequate to the production of every species of spasmodic disease, and more especially epilepsy; and yet I have good reason to know that the general run of routine practitioners, when consulted on this form of disease, scarcely ever think of enquiring into the habits of the patient, from which one would be inclined to think that they have no idea of the possibility of such a cause giving rise to such an effect. Some examples, and very striking examples, of this, will be found among the cases. Vide case xi, page 106.





Amaurosis.—We know from anatomy that the part of the cerebral pulp where the roots of the optic nerves have their origin lie very near to the cerebellum, the seat of amativeness; hence it is not unnatural to suppose, that irritation of the genital organs might be transmitted by sympathy to the roots of these nerves, and thence by reflection to those organs of sense which they supply. Such a result sometimes takes place suddenly, total blindness being at once produced; in the generality of cases, however, it takes place gradually. Congestion of that portion of the brain near the origin of the nerves of sight, is in all probability the immediate cause of this species of blindness; a condition of brain, by the way, such as may be naturally supposed to exist in the slave of sensualism. The best medical authorities assure us, that excessive indulgence in venereal pleasures is capable of producing dimness of vision; we need not therefore feel surprised that such an effect should be produced by the unnatural and destructive habit of masturbation. Some cases bearing on this effect will be found at the end of this work.

Diabetes Mellitus,—My experience since the first edition of this work has fully satisfied me that this hitherto fatal disease is frequently occasioned by selfabuse. And though I may not be able to trace the connexion between cause and effect in this instance, the reality of the connexion is not to be denied. We know full well that the functions of the sympathetic nerve are deranged in a very especial manner by this habit, and as it is this nerve which presides over the secretions, we need not wonder that the kidneys are made to feel the injury.





Haemoptysis and Consumption.—The disturbance occasioned in the circulation by this habit, and the hurried action of the heart, cause the blood to be driven with inordinate impetuosity through the lungs. The exhausted state of the patient, moreover, induced by this debilitating agent, predisposes him for all those diseases which attack a constitution weakened by any depressing cause. Hence the frequency of pulmonary consumption in the votaries of self-pollution; and yet we know full well, that this cause is scarcely ever suspected to operate in those phthisical patients who present themselves for advice to the ordinary practitioner. When the existence of phthisis is ascertained, that suffices; they never look beyond the disease; whereas by proper enquiry they might learn the cause, and if the case be not too far gone, they might, by removing the baneful cause, rescue many a juvenile victim from a premature grave.

Impotence.—The votary of sensualism, and more especially of self-abuse, we have already seen, suffers in every organ. The seminal weakness consequent on this habit is one of the most frequent causes of impotence and sterility. When impotence arises from this cause, there is want of erection, and a premature discharge of the seminal fluid before the virile member has penetrated the female organs. The connexion between impotence and self-abuse is not difficult to be traced. The habit of self-abuse induces great relaxation as well of the entire system as of the vessels of the genital organs; the latter become the seat of morbid sensibility, and great irritability, as evinced in nightly emissions, which ultimately terminates in extreme debility of the whole genital system. The quality of the seminal fluid is also deteriorated. Instead of being fructifying and prolific, it now becomes thin, watery and effete. If the sensualist will for a moment reflect on these results of his destructive habit, he cannot avoid feeling horrified at the state of degradation to which he is likely to be reduced. What again must be his feelings if he happen to be married! In this case the legitimate pleasures of the nuptial bed become converted into mortification, disgust and suppressed anger: and the wife, disappointed and deceived, finding herself made the dupe of an impotent debauchee, looks with ill-concealed scorn and disdain on the man, whom she would otherwise have cherished in her bosom, and consoled under the trying vicissitudes of ordinary life.





If in such an individual, the sight or touch of a beautiful and virtuous wife should for a moment kindle the passion of desire, he attempts to comply with the powerful suggestions of instinct and of nature; but the moment he does so, a premature emission takes place, the excitement subsides, and this residue of humanity, this apology of a man, after making the fruitless effort at coition, retires baffled, abashed and disappointed, agonised with remorse at the consciousness of being the author of his own degradation, and actually ashamed to look into the face of her, from whose smiles he would otherwise derive an additional zest for the enjoyment of prosperity, as well as comfort and consolation amid the trying vicissitudes of adversity.

Loss of Memory.—Hypochondriasis.—Idiotcy.—Insanity —-Lossof memory has been remarked by most writers as on e of the most constant attendants on excessive venery and masturbation. This is a matter of fact of daily observation. The brain, which is the organ of the mind, and the genital organs, act, as we know, the one on the other. Let the energies of the mind be called into inordinate action, and the powers of the genital organs become debilitated, and on the contrary, let us but stimulate the genital apparatus to excess, and we invariably find the intellectual powers diminished in vigour, and totally inadequate to that tension and exertion which they previously evinced. Hence the various forms of idiotcy and insanity, which so frequently result from the unnatural practice of self-abuse. And before closing this part of the work, I beg to offer it as my opinion, that many of those cases of suicide which are so frequently mentioned in the daily papers, as the result of'" temporary insanity," would, if carefully traced, be found to have had their origin in the baneful habit of self-abuse.

In what I have here said of the bad effects of selfabuse, I would not be understood to think little of the destructive consequences of inordinate venery; consequences which differ only in degree, not in kind, from those of masturbation. Excessive indulgence, and artificial stimulation have to my knowledge produced the most melancholy results on the health of individuals.

Most of these patients, too, experience a profound sense of languor, discouragement, and melancholy, giving a peculiar stamp to their character, with which all observers have been struck. The commonness of these symptoms, the importance that has always been attached to them, and the discussions to which they have given rise, require special attention; otherwise they ought not to be considered separately from the other functional disorders of which I have already treated. But they have always been considered as a special malady, or idiopathic affection; I mean hypochondriasis.





Hypochondriasis.—The patients of whom I am at present speaking, are continually beset by bitter regrets, sombre thoughts, and horrible presentiments. They feel a void in all their affections; nothing interests them; everything fatigues and annoys them; existence weighs them down without any other apparent cause, than a deep disgust for everything which can make life pleasant. This vague and instinctive feeling, this twdium vitce, which they are not able to explain to themselves, follows them every where, and constantly tempts them to commit suicide! Nevertheless these same persons are most occupied about their health, and dread the greatest misfortunes. I need not re-consider the minute care they bestow on their digestion, the state of their bowels, &c, and I shall only add a few words to what I have already said concerning their varied and continual fears.

During the night, they fancy they see thieves and murderers everywhere; when travelling they fear being upset, falling down precipices, being drowned, &c, those who are in business fancy themselves ruined, or on the point of being so—the clearest and most rigorous calculations, failing to re-assure them—at all events their fears soon return, even if once convinced. Landed proprietors, whose immense incomes are imperishable, are nevertheless haunted by the fear of dying of hunger. It seems at first difficult to reconcile such constant cares for selfpreservation with disgust of life and inclination to suicide. This contradiction would in fact be inexplicable, if it arose from reason or will. But the two contrary impulses which govern these patients are equally instinctive, and depend on the same disease. They are not opposed in reality, for the derangement of all the functions, and the cares, wants, and constant apprehensions arising from it, contribute greatly to the dislike of life, and to the





desire to put an end to such great physical and mental sufferings.

Why should we abuse to the detriment of our health and strength this noble faculty given to us by a benevolent Creator for such different purposes? Why should we suffer our imagination to carry us away to the indulgence of new venereal desires, at a time when our senses, already exhausted by accumulated enjoyment, have been rendered unfit to favour new ones? Such, however, is the power of this fertile imagination over our organs, that even when they are deaf to the appeals of the female by whom they have been exhausted, they are again re-animated and roused in favour of some other woman, who, by a single glance, imparts to them new ardour and renovated vigour, which the other was no longer able to excite. Soon, however, our physical powers, weakened by such abuses, fall into a state of prostration, from which they no longer can be raised, or from which at least they recover but imperfectly. Such is the history of those young men whom we so often see become victims to pulmonary consumption, who are in a manner dead, almost as soon as born, to the true pleasures of love, which can only be enjoyed in their full perfection, at that age when manhood has firmly established and permanently matured the ephemeral strength of nascent puberty. Thus, then, young persons, before they have attained the age of twenty-five or thirty, if they wish to preserve their health and aptitude for the pleasures of coition, should observe in such enjoyments a certain degree of restraint. And indeed, whatever may be our age and vigour, excesses in this pleasure are sure to be followed by serious, and too often fatal consequences, more especially in persons of sanguine temperament, disposed to haemorrhages; in those whose chest is predisposed to organic affections; as also in those who are endowed with great delicacy and mobility of the nervous system. In the latter case (and I cannot repeat it too often), a dismal train of nervous affections, the real cause of which is generally kept secret from the practitioner, will be sure to follow; among the most prominent of which I must place Epilepsy.





TREATMENT OF THE EFFECTS OF

ONANISM.



When a general state of languor and lassitude, joined to a pallid face, emaciation of the frame, fcetor of the breath, and the appearance of a bluish circle around the eyes, give grounds for suspecting that our patient is addicting himself to some secret practices, we should not lose a moment in investigating the nature of the case. We must narrowly watch all the movements of the patient; and if we succeed in discovering that he is addicted to the vice of masturbation, either by means of the signs already stated and by examining the parts of generation, or by eliciting an acknowledgment of the fact, we must instanter have recourse to all the means calculated to reform him. These means, however, must vary according to the age of the person, according to his constitution, as also according to the state of his intellectual faculties.

Should there be any grounds for suspecting that this abominable practice has gained a footing among the young pupils of a boarding-school, the strictest surveillance should be instituted over the conduct of the pupils; the use of single sleeping rooms should, if possible, be prohibited; large dormitories should always be preferred; strict discipline should be kept up; and the same precautions which are calculated to prevent the habit of self-pollution, should also be employed to prevent the repetition of the act.

There is one remark which I think it important to make here, and that is, that certain over-precautions, injudiciously and indiscreetly adopted, may lead to bad consequences, and suggest to the innocent minds of young persons ideas which they never would have dreamed of. I have known that measures were adopted in a certain establishment for young persons, which were of so palpable and so injudicious a nature, as to set on foot an enquiry among the pupils as to what could have put it into the master's head to adopt them.

When, however, the victim of masturbation is of a more advanced age, and has gone beyond the age of puberty, our chief, and, in fact, most effectual appeals, must be to his understanding. If he be a person of a cultivated mind, our mode of proceeding must be of a corresponding character; it is in vain for us to dwell on the infamous nature of his conduct, or on the enormity of his crime; there is no use in pointing out to him that his habit is contrary to the laws of God and man; such moral sermons, experience tells us, have but little effect on young folk, who, even more than men of more advanced years, will be regulated in their conduct almost solely by their immediate interest. With persons of this unfortunate propensity friends have been too much in the habit of appealing to mere abstract principles. There is no class of persons with whom morality and virtue, which, in a practical point of view, are but the habit of performing actions useful to society, should be made to depend more on real individual interests, and not on abstractions, than with onanists. Let the young man be made to feel, then, that that which destroys his strength, and renders him unable to be of any use to his fellow-citizens, should meet nothing from them but merited contempt. Point out to him, in the immediate and inevitable effects of masturbation, in that debility which always follows it, in that lassitude of body and mind which it invariably produces, the precursors of a much more alarming state; let him compare the numerous advantages of health and strength in all the conditions of life with the wretched state of both physical and moral nothingness, which is the fatal effect of onanism. Raise the mind of your young patient by every means in your power; develope in him those generous sentiments, of which youth appears so fond, and success will probably be the result of your efforts.





To such moral appeals the judicious practitioner should join other counsels. He must take particular care to change the habits of the unfortunate patient whom onanism is leading to ruin. He must enjoin a residence in the country, agricultural pursuits, and all the usual engagements of a country life. A wholesome, but at the same time a non-stimulant, diet must be adopted, and rigidly persevered in; alcoholic drinks must be sedulously avoided ; a habit of exercise regularly adhered to, and carried to fatigue; sleep not of too long duration; a hard bed;—all these means will contribute powerfully to the success of the treatment.

In treating the debilitating effects of onanism, I





•

cannot recommend too strongly the use of gymnastic exercises; they are applicable to all ages and all sexes, and should, in fact, constitute an essential part of public education. By keeping the body and mind in a constant state of activity, they have been found at times more effectual in eradicating this deplorable habit, than mere cold, serious representations and exhortations, which often have no other effect than that of augmenting the weakness of the moral faculties, which is already but too great.

There is one remark which I cannot here avoid making, as I think it of primary importance: it is, that light reading, which affords so much amusement to the mind, should be strictly prohibited; by its effect of exalting the imagination and debarring the individual from exercising the body sufficiently, it seems calculated to favour very strongly the propensity to onanism. If any books are to be allowed to persons addicted to this vice, they should be works on natural philosophy or natural history, which excite the curiosity, and may tend to incline the individual to turn his attention to experimental research, or to botanical excursions, which will thus afford him an exercise equally agreeable to the mind, and conducive to bodily health. The great rule to be observed in the cases now before us is never to allow the patient to be idle. There is no instance where the adage that "idleness is the mother of mischief" will be found more strongly verified than in the case of those addicted to onanism. It matters little what occupation the person may select; all that is necessary is, that he should work, and that a disposition to sleep soundly should thus be induced at night, which may have the effect of diverting his attention from his former depraved habits.

With respect to those persons who, for want of education, are left as it were defenceless against the depraved habit of masturbation, it is extremely difficult to devise an effectual mode of treating them, more especially when their propensities to masturbation are very strong, and the habit of long standing, and has taken deep root. In such cases moral exhortations are found to be of little avail; the only means from which we can expect to derive any benefit are strict regimen, excessive exercise, and laborious employment; these may divert the mind from the objects which habitually engross its attention: it must be confessed, however, that those means prove too often ineffectual, and the evil, in spite of all our care, continues to make rapid progress.





In those cases where the force of temperament, or that of habit, which is frequently more powerful, appear to place the patient beyond the control of those means already pointed out, there still remains a remedy which I have reason to know has in several instances proved successful: this remedy is love. Within my own experience, several persons of both sexes have been reclaimed from the baneful habit of masturbation by marrying. It will be previously advisable to seek medical advice, and if there be not more powerful objections to the measure, to endeavour to unite the unfortunate victim of onanism to an amiable woman, who may inspire him with a feeling of affection which may contravene and ultimately destroy the abominable passion for self-pollution. I have known the father of a young man, who, after having tried every other means in his power to deter him from his vicious habit, contrived to induce him to marry;—the youth was very soon reclaimed.

When masturbation has produced considerable disturbance in the system, and has involved its unhappy victim in diseases of more or less severity, the first condition, and that without which it is absolutely impossible to re-establish the patient's health, is at once to relinquish the destructive habit which has occasioned those bad consequences. This point being gained, the secondary affection must be treated as though it depended on some other cause. In cases of great debility of the physical and moral powers, the most eminent practitioners have experienced the greatest difficulty in re-establishing the patient's strength; after masturbation the stomach has often been found so very weak, as not to be able to endure the presence of tonics when taken into it. There are also, accompanying this state, irritations of internal parts, which render it very difficult to treat the diseases induced by onanism. However, if the nervous system alone appears to be debilitated, wholesome and nourishing diet, judicious exercise and cold baths, will be serviceable. If the lungs be the seat of any lurking inflammation, we must have recourse to the means calculated to remove this state. Irritation existing in the digestive apparatus, more especially in the stomach, will demand the greatest care and circumspection in the mode of living, especially in the selection of food, and also in the use of stimulants, which the debilitated state of the patient too often urges him to indulge in.





As a general rule, it should be rigidly observed, to remove from the treatment of the diseases occasioned by onanism everything which might have a tendency, either by its action on the nervous system, or by the opportunities it might afford, to awaken the penchant for this habit. The next thing to be done is to repair the loss of strength and substance occasioned by it; but in doing this the greatest caution is necessary, because, as we have already mentioned, besides the debilitated state of the whole system, we often have to contend with latent inflammations of some important viscus; from this it will appear how very important it is to consult the experienced practitioner, and not to rely on the indiscriminate use of tonic and stimulating remedies, which only for a time remove the languor and exhaustion with which such patients are afflicted. In conclusion, I once more urge on the victims of masturbation the indispensable and imperative necessity of resorting at the earliest opportunity for professional advice, as being the surest and most effectual,—nay, in truth, the only effectual,—mode of freeing themselves from the complicated and too often fatal consequences of this unnatural habit.



IMPUISSANCE.

By impuissance, or impotence, is understood an incapacity or inability to perform the venereal act. In a practical point of view it is important that we should not confound this with sterility, which is characterised by the presence of venereal desire and venereal powers, without, however, a prolific power. A sterile or barren person may possess a perfect aptitude for coition, though a total inaptitude for generation, whilst impuissance is characterised by a permanent or temporary abolition of the powers necessary for perfect copulation. In order to avoid all misunderstanding, we shall take care to distinguish impotence, in this place, from sterility or inability to propagate the species.





The most distinguished pathologists have agreed in classing impotence among nervous diseases, and have made the seat of the affection in man to be the corpus cavernosum, which is momentarily deprived of the afflux of blood necessary to produce an erection. In women its seat seems to be the vagina, which is become insensible to the venereal stimulus. How far this allocation of the affection now under consideration is correct, we shall see presently. Before proceeding further, I may remark, that impotence is more frequent in the male than in the female, from the relative simplicity of the structure of the organs in the latter.

Different Species of Impotence.—This affection may, for practical purposes, be divided into absolute and relative, constitutional and local, direct or indirect, permanent or transient.

Impotence is said to be absolute, when it depends on absence of the genital organs, or on their defective conformation. The absence of testicles is no impediment to amorous enjoyment. Eunuchs are sterile, but not necessarily impotent.

Among the defects of conformation of the genital apparatus, which may obstruct more or less the act of copulation, may be enumerated in the male:—1st, a phimosis—natural or accidental; 2nd, imperforate state of the gland; 3rd, excessive length of the prepuce; 4th, adhesion of the prepuce to the gland; 5th, excessive schirrous enlargement of the prostate gland; 6th, fungous growth along the corpora cavernosa; 7th, swelling of the verumontanum.

In the female:—1st, adhesion of the labia externa; 2nd, imperforate state of the vagina, or the existence of a polypus in its cavity.

Impotence is relative when it depends on a want of proportion between the parts, which in coition should concur and correspond in the act of generation,—such as excessive size of the penis, and narrowness of the vagina.





Impotence is constitutional when it depends on excessive frigidity of the constitution, or is a consequence of general debility affecting the entire system. Constitutional or connate impotence is incurable, and produces sterility; it is sometimes observed to occur in the offspring of debilitated old men, or in the offspring of those who are worn out by debaiichery and onanism. Long continued ill health may produce this effect in any constitution, however robust it may have originally been.

Impotence is said to be local when a person, possessed of considerable vigour in other respects, labours under marked debility of the genital organs. Persons of a melancholy turn, are predisposed to anaphrodisia, or aversion to the venereal act, which state may result— 1st, from too eager desires, and too ardent an imagination; 2nd, from the fear of not meeting a mutual return of love; 3rd, from the extatic effect produced by the sight of a beloved object; 4th, by a feeling of confidence, occasioned by the pure suggestions of sincere love; 5th, by extreme nervous susceptibility.

Impotence is direct when it results from frigidity of temperament, from general debility, or local debility of the generative organs.

Impotence is indirect when it exists in an individual otherwise endowed with a vigorous temperament, and a natural conformation of the organs of generation, or when it is owing to a concentration of the vital powers on some one part. Should the afflux of blood towards the corpus cavernosum, necessary to produce an erection, be suspended, and a sudden rush of blood to the brain or heart take place from an excited or alarmed imagination, impotence will be the result.

Impotence is permanent when the cause continues, and incessantly keeps the genital organs under its influence.

Impotence, on the contrary, is temporary, when it depends on a physical cause, which can weaken the generative organs only for a time; or on a moral cause, which may suspend the activity of those organs, but which will cease after a time and leave them free.

Causes of Impotence.—Impotence may be the consequence of particular debility of the generative organs, arising from, or occasioned by, too early venereal enjoyment, abuse of these enjoyments, or much more frequently from that still more dangerous habit, we mean that of onanism. In the latter cause an erection no longer takes place; though the mind may still be disposed, the erector muscles, whose action is necessary for the performance of the act, are debilitated and paralysed. Should semen be secreted in such a case, it is thin, serous, and totally destitute of any prolific qualities. Anaphrodisia, owing to premature abuse of venereal enjoyment, is very difficult of cure.





Impotence is frequently occasioned by moral causes, and more especially by affections of the mind. Thus it may be occasioned by fear, by suddenly conceived dislike, and other such causes. A sigh misunderstood or misinterpreted, a thought suggesting itself to the mind, an equivocal word, are oftentimes sufficient to destroy the illusion, and change the previously ardent feelings into absolute frigidity.

Deep thinking, continued without intermission, may be productive of impotence. Hard labour, excessive study, long-continued watching, weaken the entire system, and are very detrimental to the general strength, and especially to the generative faculty.

Impotence has been occasioned by excessive desire, and by intense love. Indifference, and the debilitating passions may produce impotence. These causes act by throwing the entire system in general, and the genital organs in particular, into a state of collapse. Pain, disappointment, uneasiness of mind, hatred, dislike, jealousy, fear, are also causes of impotence. I may say the same of the fear which some individuals entertain of not being able to acquit themselves satisfactorily in performing the act. This is a much more frequent cause of impotence than is generally supposed.

Extreme respect for the object of affection may also occasion a temporary impotence. Bad feeding, habitual and long-continued abuse of spirituous liquors may also occasion impotence; as may also the accidental, though not habitual abuse of alcoholic drinks, overloading of the stomach, etc. An excess in drink, I have reason to know, produces genital syncope.





Treatment.—This must obviously be regulated by the cause of the affection. It may, however, be resolved; —1st, into removing from the mind everything which could unnecessarily excite the action of the genital organs; 2nd, into strengthening the system, if tone be wanting; 3rd, regulating the functions, if they seem to require it; 4th, removing muscular debility on the one hand, and nervous susceptibility on the other: or, in other words, in establishing the equilibrium between the muscular and nervous systems.

If impotence be owing to mental or physical irritation, I should, instead of prescribing narcotics, which are so injurious to the digestive functions, recommend exercise of a moderate kind, a milk and vegetable diet, to keep the mind in a quiet and tranquil state, free from those thoughts which may light up and fire the imagination. Abstinence from spices and from alcoholic drinks, exercise in the open country air, and keeping the attention engaged on some useful occupation, on the good old maxim—

"Otia si tollas, periere Cupidinis arcus."

If, however, there be a state of atony, or want of tone in the individual, the very opposite plan of treatment will be called for. Cold bathing and other tonics will then be indicated.

Should the cause of impotence be the habit of selfpollution, the first and great, nay, the indispensable rule is utterly to abandon the destructive habit, and then to adopt a strengthening diet: to banish from the imagination all those ideas and recollections which may awaken the long-indulged and still lurking propensity, and to restore the digestive and other functions which are sure to be impaired by this pernicious habit. To accomplish the latter object, and an object, by the way, of paramount importance, professional advice is indispensably necessary for reasons already assigned.

When the cause of impotency is of a purely moral nature, depending solely on the feelings of the individual, and unaccompanied by any physical or bodily injury, the cure is within the reach of every one who will but attend to the necessary conditions. Patients of this class are generally of a nervous temperament; they are easily excited, have strong feelings, and with them even the least occurrence is sufficient to cause alarm, and make them apprehend their incompetency to discharge the virile duty. On close examination it will be found, if not always, at least generally, that such persons have been in early life addicted to the vice of onanism. They are conscious of this vice, and this consciousness haunts them in advanced life, and makes them doubtful, or altogether to despair, of their virile powers. The cure with such persons must be partly physical, but in the chief part moral. It was in cases of this kind that the great Hunter was principally successful. He enjoined abstinence from sexual enjoyment, for a definite period, and a tonic course of diet and medicine. It frequently happened that before the end of the prescribed time, confidence was restored to the patient.





DISCHARGES FROM THE URETHRA.

I shall not here consider the gonorrhceal discharge, as I intend to treat of that affection at considerable length in another place. There are, however, other discharges, and those of a serious nature, which oftentimes call for the skilful and attentive interference of the medical man. The first of these is what is by some called gleet, and which, correctly speaking, is a consequence of gonorrhoea, either neglected or injudiciously treated. Of this, however, I treat in another place. There is another discharge, and one which, from the cause which produces it, demands the earliest attention, and that is the discharge of semen, either without there having been sexual connexion, or even during sleep. These emissions are invariably the result of a debilitated frame; and, what is too true, such debility is almost invariably induced by the long-indulged habit of selfpollution. This affection is characterised by the emission

D





of semen upon the very first attempt at sexual intercourse, and often before a regular erection can take place; sitting even in a heated room, or before a bed, will produce it. I have daily instances of such debility, and my invariable rule, and one which scarcely ever fails, is to prescribe a regular course of tonic medicines, suited to the nature of the case, and the peculiar state of the individual. As this is an affection so very prevalent, and one too which influences so seriously the happiness of individuals, as well as the well-being of society, I dread prescribing any specific rules for treatment; I therefore recommend the individual so affected to apply without delay for the assistance of the medical practitioner. M'Dougall in his able translation of Lallemand on Spermatorrhoea, says:—

Another and very frequent symptom in cases of spermatorrhoea, is the occurrence of urethral discharge from very slight excitement. Several cases of this kind have come under my notice, the patients having consulted me on account of the discharge. These cases often give rise to distressing suspicions, and much family unhappiness, especially as they often occur in married men. The symptoms are often almost as severe as those of virulent clap, and the discharge is attended with great irritation in the neighbourhood of the prostate, and frequent desire of micturition. The discharge came on in one case of a married man who consulted me, after taking a single tumbler of whiskey and water at night—this gentleman not having been in the habit of taking spirits for several years, on account of continued ill-health. The discharge in these cases is thicker than that of ordinary clap, and sticks in patches on the linen. These patches may be scaled off, after which there is little mark left, and the discharge seldom penetrates through calico, so that on the opposite side of the shirt there is little or no appearance of stain. On wetting the linen, the discharge feels slippery, and it is washed off with difficulty. I am inclined to believe that these discharges are not contagious; but notwithstanding this, sexual intercourse should be avoided on account of the injury that may result to the patient himself. In most cases, indeed, connexion is impossible during the first stages of the discharge, on





account of the painful chordee to which excitement gives rise.

I have generally, on questioning these patients, found that such discharges were connected more or less with deficiency of generative power. In the case I have above alluded to, impotence was almost complete; and in another similar case occurring in the person of a married surgeon, the powers had greatly declined. Both these patients were in the prime of life, and both had, in their youth, led very irregular lives.

The irritation in these cases, I am inclined to believe, is situated in the posterior part of the urethra. Indeed, the surgeon whose case I have just alluded to, believed himself affected by enlarged prostate—many of the symptoms of which generally accompany the discharge I have described, especially frequent desire to pass water, and a feeling as though the bladder were never' completely emptied, or as though two or three drops of urine were retained in the posterior part of the urethra.

This peculiar form of urethral discharge has hitherto, for the most part, I believe, been confounded with contagious clap; indeed, many members of our profession are in the habit of setting down all discharges from the urethra, indiscriminately, as the result of impure connection, however positive the patient may be that such has not taken place. In all the cases I have hitherto met with, however, the patients have admitted that they had previously been affected with contagious clap—frequently on more than one occasion. The discharges I have described are, I am inclined to believe, from the number of cases I have met with since my attention was first attracted by the subject, by no means uncommon, and certainly deserving the careful attention of the profession.



GONORRHOEA.

Illustrated by Plate 9.

The disease which bears this name, and which in

popular parlance goes by the name of clap, may present

itself to the practitioner, in either the acute or chronic

form. The best authority on this subject has stated it to be his opinion that it is not necessarily acute at the onset; "but," says Langston Parker, in his admirable work On the Modern Treatment ef Syphilitic Diseases, dedicated to M. Ricord, surgeon to the Venereal Hospital in Paris, "gonorrhoea, a disease of daily occurrence, is perhaps as much or more than any other presented to the surgeon, the daily source of annoyance to him, and anxiety and weariness to his patient. This, we apprehend, arises in a great measure from the want of a correct knowledge of its modifications and varieties,* and consequently an uncertainty in the treatment more especially adapted to its different forms. Gonorrhoea consists in inflammation, more or less acute, of the mucous membrane of the urethra, or other parts of the genitourinary passages, accompanied by the secretion of a muco-purulent fluid of a yellow or greenish appearance; pain, itching, or irritation in voiding the urine, with, in the male, repeated and involuntary erections of the penis. "We believe, with the best pathologists of the day, that gonorrhoea, though the result of impure cohabitation, and hence termed a venereal disease, is an affection of a totally different character to the primitive syphilitic ulcer. We do not believe the opinions of the late Dr. Wallace to be true, that syphilis and gonorrhoea are varieties of the same disease;+ modern testimony, drawn from the results of inoculation, universally proving that the pus of chancre has never produced gonorrhoea, and the reverse. J Holding these views, we believe, with M. Cullerier, that gonorrhoea, properly so called, is incapable of producing secondary symptoms, and that the in





* Varieties of gonorrhoea.—Ricord.

First species.—Gonorrhoea in the female:

["the vulva, "J



may exist alone, or va-

riously combined.





Second species.—Gonorrhoea in the male:

I the urethra, ~\ may exist alone,

Varieties, seated in < on the prepuce, or > or variously com(the glans penis, J bined. f On the Venereal Disease, Sfc, p. 284, and elsewhere. j See Ricord, and the authors quoted by him in his work already referred to, also Cullerier, in Lucas Championniere's work, p. 384, &c. &c





stances, which are however comparatively rare, in which this is said to have occurred, have been owing to chancres or primary venereal sores of the urethra, which an imperfect diagnosis has, in the first instance, confounded with gonorrhoea.

"The causes of gonorrhoea are various; the most frequent, however, is cohabitation with a female affected with the same disease. It is certain that inflammation, with muco-puruient discharge from the urethra, may be the result of connexion with women who labour under various forms of diseases, such as inflammation, of the vagina; the lochial or menstrual discharges, fluor albus, ulcerations of various kinds not syphilitic, different morbid conditions of the os uteri, amongst which Cullerier and Ratier specially mention the cancerous ulcer. It appears to me evident that, in the present state of science, it is impossible with certainty to ascertain what may be the true cause of that gonorrhoea which succeeds cohabitation, unless the female be submitted to examination with the speculum: and hence M. Ricord states that no confidence is to be placed upon any statements of this character, unless the speculum has been employed as a means of confirming our diagnosis; the condition of the constitution also at the time of exposure to infection must be ranked as a predisposing cause. Go norrhcaa is also due to other causes apart from sexual intercourse, as masturbation, habitual costiveness, inflammation of the prostate gland, certain morbid conditions of the bladder or ureters, particularly the presence of calculi in these parts, piles, and the excessive or immoderate use of wine or fermented liquors generally. In children this affection is sometimes dependent upon teething or intestinal worms. It also recognizes for its cause a gouty or scorbutic diathesis, or succeeds to the suppression of habitual discharges, or the cure of old standing cutaneous eruptions. In addition to all these causes, which are strictly internal, gonorrhoea is produced by external violence or injuries to the penis, and the operation of a second class of causes of various kinds which are external."

Gonorrhoeal inflammation may be diffused over a wide surface, and "may involve, at the same time, the whole of the urethra, the bladder, the testicles, the glans and prepuce in the male; and in the female the nymphas, clitoris, labiae, vagina, &c.; and thus commencing at the preputial end of the penis, in the fossa navicularis, it not unfrequently creeps slowly on to the posterior parts of the urethra, to the bladder, or to the testicles, -while it decreases or ceases entirely in the parts first affected."* It may be confined to the mucous membrane itself, or extend to the tissues beneath it; in the latter instance the irritation constantly determines a flow of blood into the cells of the erectile tissue of the corpora cavernosa and corpus spongiosum, which occasions a continual tension of the penis. Occasionally the inflammation becomes located in some part of the canal, producing thickening, effusion into the submucous cellular tissue, and in some cases ulceration; in these forms the disease assumes more of a local character, and is not so much disposed to spread by continuity of tissue.





When gonorrhoea first makes its appearance, the symptoms which ordinarily characterise it, are itching and tingling sensations at the extremity of the penis, and some slight pain just opposite the frsenum. A certain interval of time elapses between the application of the infection and the appearance of the gonorrhoea. It is generally admitted that gonorrhoea usually takes place sooner after infection than chancre. It may be protracted however for two or three weeks. The patient first experiences a slight degree of heat and uneasiness about the orifice of the urethra; the edges of the opening swell, become red, and soon after the discharge is observed. A thin yellowish fluid issues from the urethra, increases in quantity, and becomes thick and yellow; it sometimes presents a greenish appearance. When the inflammation is severe, there is a smarting or ourning felt in passing water, and considerable pain extending from the glans along the urethra to the perineum. After the passing of the urine, the increased secretion flows very copiously from the urethra. The symptoms go on to increase in violence, if medical aid be not soon resorted to, and they last for a certain time; they then, in some rare instances, begin to decline, the pain on making water gradually subsides, the dis

* Wallace, pp. 237-8.





charge diminishes in quantity, and goes on decreasing, till it may disappear altogether; in such a case, and this is certainly not a common one, the duration of the disease may vary from three to six or seven weeks. At other times the' discharge, instead of disappearing entirely, diminishes in quantity, becomes thick, has a less bright yellow colour, and occasionally becomes altogether colourless. The scalding felt on making water is lost, and no other symptom remains, except the increased secretion. In this state the disease may last for a great length of time, several months—nay, even years: it then goes by the name of gleet.

Persons who are infected with clap do not, however, often come off so easily as this. Frequently there is very severe inflammation; the glans penis swells and assumes a bright red colour; the lips of the urethra become very much swollen and red; the foreskin or prepuce becomes tumid and cedematous to such a degree, as entirely to envelop the glans penis, constituting what is technically called phimosis (See Plate 9, Pig. 2), the inflammation at the time extending up along the urethra to the bladder, the mucous membrane of which is, in severe cases, involved in the inflammation; there is in this case severe pain extending along to the perinosum, and anteriorly in the region of the bladder. The patient also is tormented with painful erections of the penis, especially when in bed. These are repeated frequently, and cause most distressing pain, in consequence of the effusion of coagulable lymph, either in the interior of the corpus cavernosum, or corpus spongiosum urethra: when the penis is erected it becomes arched or curved,—this is usually called chordee (see Plate 9, Fig 1), the part being, as it were, tied with a cord.

The inflammation, I have said, sometimes extends to the bladder; this is indicated by an incessant desire to pass urine, and by a feeling of great pain when doing so. The scalding felt in passing the urine is now become intolerable, and in consequence of the congested state of the vessels lining the urethra, the calibre of the canal is diminished, the urine comes out in a smaller stream, and the pain is thereby still further augmented. When the case is neglected, this state goes on increasing to such an extent, that the urine now comes away in drops, or, a complete retention of urine may take place, the consequence of which may be rupture of the bladder, and, ultimately, death; it sometimes happens that some few of the over-distended vessels give way, and blood passes away with the urine-; this is rather favourable, as it relieves the part. Such are the characters which characterise clap in its severest form.





"It is of immense importance," says Parker, in hia work, dedicated to the junior members of the profession, "that gonorrhoea should be prevented, or cut short in its commencement, since its duration, in many instances, is almost indefinite, and its consequences so serious. Patients, in a state of alarm after a suspected connection, frequently seek the advice of their surgeon with the following symptoms: slight irritation in the urethra, dragging of the penis and testicles, uneasiness in voiding the urine; with redness and tumefaction of the lips of the meatus, and a slight increase in the natural secretion of the mucous membrane of the urethra itself. These symptoms do not indicate, as M. Bicord justly observes, that a gonorrhoea has been contracted, since an excessive excitement of the organs of generation, without infection, might produce them; but in the positive absence of any means of a differential diagnosis between this and the commencement of actual gonorrhoea, it behoves the patient to be careful. M. Ricord is of opinion that many gonorrhoeas might be avoided, and the symptoms cut short on the onset, if the patients did not commit errors or excesses in diet at this period, and continue to expose themselves to all kinds of excitement. This opinion is deserving of the more attention, since we commonly see a discharge from the urethra set up and continue for some days after a debauch, and then of itself subside.* When the symptoms we have indicated make their appearance, the patient should strictly adopt and adhere to the lowest possible diet, repose as much as possible in the recumbent position, and take smart aperients with diluent drinks. The warm bath must be avoided; this, of itself, under such circum

* The researches of M. Lombard, of Geneva, prove that the excessive use of malt liquors, wines, &c, tends to produce discharges-from the urethra, and inflammation of its lining membrane.





Stances, has frequently produced the disease; the cold hath, in warm weather, may be used."

Treatment.—Before I proceed to give an outline ot the treatment necessary for the cure of gonorrhoea, I earnestly urge it on our non-medical readers to apply for medical aid as soon as they suspect, in the slightest degree, that they are infected. By so doing they will save themselves a world of suffering and annoyance, and prevent the establishment of some of the very painful sequelae of gonorrhoea, I mean the formation of gleet already adverted to. Considering gonorrhoea to have attacked the patient for the first time, I am always most successful when I adopt the purely antiphlogistic means, viz., I employ saline purgatives with antimony. The patient must remain in the recumbent posture, if his situation in life will allow of it; he should have the penis and testicles well supported. Should he be obliged to go about, he must sedulously avoid exercise or exertion and all manner of excesses. The diet is a point which requires particular attention—it should be low; animal food should be abstained from whilst the symptoms are urgent; no wine or spirituous drinks are to be taken. In some cases it may be necessary to take blood from the arm, and from the loins and perinceum by cupping or leeches. After the bowels have been well cleared out, sudorifics—such as the liq. ammonise acetatis with nitre—-nitre with cream of tartar—and antimonials, should be given in considerable quantities. Mucilaginous drinks,—such as linseed tea, barley water, and the like, should be taken freely, in order to dilute the urine, and render it less stimulating to the inflamed urethra. Alkaline Solutions, such astheliqnor potassa?, are very useful in this respect. I find it best to give a moderate dose of about $en drops immediately after making water. If there be much pain about the urethra and bladder, after putting in practice these very active means, I would recommend the patient to have recourse to the warm bath, and to take a full dose of Dover's powder, opium, or hyoscyamus. Should the uneasy sensation about the bladder and urethra continue, active antiphlogistic means must be perseveringly employed. In the milder forms of gonorrhoea, less severe means will suffice; the bowels must be well





opened, the patient must be kept quiet, and on low diet, take nitre with cream of tartar, and plenty of demulcent liquids. When the penis is very much inflamed, relief may be had from the application of cold; in some cases, however, warm fomentations are found more effectual; immersing the penis in warm water frequently is in all cases advisable.

With respect to the utility or expediency of employing injections for the cure of gonorrhoea, there is considerable diversity of opinion. These local applications to the lining membrane of the urethra have been pivided into three or four classes,—thus we have emollient, sedative, astringent and stimulating injections; but it should, however, be constantly kept in remembrance, that if the employment of the injection the first or second time produces great pain, and the scalding in passing the urine is much increased, we must have recourse to other means of cure. What I have now said respecting the treatment of gonorrhoea, may be considered as referring to the rational treatment such as one would be led to adopt a priori from considering that the pathology of the disease is inflammation, and that the seat of this inflammation is the mucous membrane of the urethra. I shall proceed to consider the empirical treatment or that mode of treatment which has the recommendation of experience, and which is not that which one would be inclined to adopt from reasoning. Certain remedies have been used in the treatment of gonorrhoea, and have been found to exercise considerable influence over it, which are almost the very last that I should have expected to prove beneficial. One of these is Cubeb pepper or Java pepper. If the disease has existed for any length of time, there is less likelihood of the remedy proving beneficial. It should be observed, also, that the presence of high inflammatory symptoms does not contra-indicate the use of this remedy.

The next remedy which has the approval of experience in the treatment of gonorhcea, is the balsam of copaiva. This may be given either dropped in white wine, or combined with mucilage in the form of a mixture. Another way of taking the balsam is by dropping it on moist sugar; it may be also administered in a mixture combined with the liquor potassee. Provided the use of antiphlogistic means has been premised, my experience warrants me in stating that the balsam of copaiva is decidedly successful in bringing the inflammation to a close. It may not be out of place here to mention, that the continued and free use of it is apt occasionally to produce an eruption of roseola over the whole body, accompanied with fever, head ache, and foul tongue; should this occur, nothing more is necessary than saline purges, attention to diet, and keeping within doors.





It may be well to notice some other circumstances which are sometimes attendant on gonorrhoea. And, first, the inflammation of the uretha may occasion inflammation of the inguinal glands, or bubo; this symptom will not give much trouble, if the antiphlogistic means be carefully attended to, and the patient be kept at rest; the treatment of the swelling is to be conducted on the ordinary principles. The inexperienced practitioner, or the patient, if he trust to his own judgment, may here commit a serious error, by either employing mercury for a bubo, which is but sympathetic and not venereal, or by considering a bubo, which is really syphilitic, to be merely sympathetic. Here, again, I cannot help urging on him an immediate application to a medical practitioner, who can alone distinguish between the two cases with anything like certainty to the patient's safety.

Another attendant on gonorrhoea is phimosis, as shewn in Plate 9, Fig. 2 (and often ends in the total destruction of the glans penis, as shewn in Plate 12, Figs. 1 and 2), that is, a contraction of the lining of the prepuce forming the orifice, so that the part cannot be drawn over the glans. In this case, local means must be employed to reduce the inflammation; cleanliness is absolutely necessary; the patient must also inject some mild liquid between the prepuce and the glans, in order to prevent an accumulation of the gonorhoeal discharge, which, if allowed to remain, will irritate the delicate covering of the glans and lining of the prepuce, increasing the inflammation of those parts, and sometimes leading to serious ulcerations, as shewn in Plate 11, Fig, 3. Hence the necessity of repeated ablution of these parts by means of a syringe.





Sometimes the reverse of this state takes place, and is attended with much more trouble and annoyance', called paraphimosis, as shewn in Plate 9, Fig. L This generally occurs to persons who have short pre-puces, and arises in consequence of the prepuce slipping Behind the glans, in which situation it may become swollen, and so make a stricture around the glans, causing great pain, and sometimes sloughing of the part. What I would advise in this case is, to get a bason of cold water, and let the patient, with a sponge or piece of lint, bathe the part so as to cool it. Then the surgeon is to press gently with the thumb the swollen glans, or with the thumb and finger of one hand, whilst he gradu* ally draws over it the contracted orifice of the prepuce with the thumb and finger of the other. Me is to pro* ceed slowly, squeezing out the blood from the glans, as well as he can, so as to reduce its size, then managing to push it gradually into the opening of the orifice, at the same time that he draws the prepuce gently forward, and he will then succeed in replacing the parts, and in relieving the patient from a very distressing and painful situation. When the prepuce, however, has been left for a considerable time in this unnatural situation, it will be necessary to cut into the strictured part.

Sometimes the irritation of the gonorrhoeal discharge produces warts, either on the glans or prepuce of the male; and in the female, at the orifice of the vagina, the nympha?, perinasum, and near the anus. When these are of moderate size, they are to be treated by irritating substances or escharotics. First, we must endeavour to put a stop to the cause which produces them—-namely, the discharge^ and also to the state of inflammation and excoriation of the surface on which the production of those warts depend. After this is done, the warts may be rubbed with lunar caustic, or we may sprinkle over them some irritating powder—as the pulvis sabinas, or aeetate of copper. When they . are large, however, they will not yield to these remedies, but must be removed with the knife or scissors; and in a few days rub the surface with lunar caustic, so as to prevent a recurrence of their growth. Some recommend strong acids, or the acetic acid, which acts by destroying the vitality of the part.





Another attendant on gonorrhoea is swelled testicle, as shewn in Plate 14, Fig. 1. This is neither more nor less than active inflammation of the gland; and such an affection is to be treated by the ordinary antiphlogistic means;-»free bleeding by leeches, warm fomentations and poultices, the recumbent position) and active purgation. When the swelling does not yield to those means, I derive great assistance from the employment of tartar emetic, so as to keep up nausea and even vomiting— this I find very beneficial. The recumbent position ia of the utmost advantage, and the patient should avoid going about his business too soon, after he has obtained relief from this affection.

"In gonorrhoea the discharge is generally more frequent, and the inflammation more acute than in leucor* rhoea. In the former disease the glands of the groin are more frequently enlarged, tender, and painful, and in gonorrhoea the affection extends to the urethra in about two-thirds of the cases.*'*

"I have stated,'1 says Parker, "that I have seen severe inflammation of the glands and prepuce, with ulcerations, occur after connection with females suffering from leucorrhcea or whites. I shall relate a case of this kind which made a great impression upon me, from the anxiety and distress it occasioned in the family in which it happened. A lady of most exemplary and ir* reproachable character, the mother of nine children, in the seventh month of her pregnancy of her tenth child, became affected with itchings and swellings of the labia, and a muco-purulent discharge from the vagina; her husband consulted me a few weeks afterwards (having certainly had no other connexion), with severe inflammation and excoriation of the surface of the glans and prepuce, from which ooied a tnuco-purulent fluid. Some slight astringent washes soon removed the disease, which was thought of no more. The lady, however, became again pregnant, and about the same period of her pregnancy, her leucorrhoea again returned more severely than before. Her husband again consulted me: the internal surface of the prepuce and glands were swollen, intensely

* See the paper of M. Ricorcl, Mfmobts de I'Acade'mie limjalc ile Medecine, 1833.





red, painful, and covered with small apthas; in some places the mucous membane was denuded, exposing a deep red surface, secre^B a thick pus. The general plan of treatment recommended in the article Balanitis, was followed, but the disease became exceedingly tedious and troublesome; no sooner had one crop of aptha; been removed, than a second made their appearance; the denuded surfaces spread, and deepened into foul conditioned ulcers, till at length a complete phymosis was established, and it was not till after many weeks of treatment that the patient was perfectly restored.

"This case certainly proved that ulcerations of a bad character may follow connexion with females labouring under leucorrhoea, but the ulcers themselves are not of a specific character, and yield to a general plan of treatment. I have never seen a true urethral gonorrhoea succeed to connexion with females suffering from leucorrhoea only. I consider it impossible that constitutional or secondary symptoms should be the consequence of diseases of such a character."

Before closing what I have said on the subject of gonorrhoea, I wish to make a few remarks on the use of injtctions. Many surgeons object to their use on the ground of their giving rise to stricture and other diseased conditions of the urethra. In my opinion, such results are attributable rather to the long continuance of uncon . trolled inflammatory action. I often meet in practice with two different conditions of the urethra, which often give both patient and doctor an immensity of annoyance. The first is, where a bad gonorrhoea has been so far cured as that only a few drops of discharge will remain, mixed up and diluted with the glairy transparent mucus of tha urethra; this still has the character and infecting quality of true gonorrhoeal discharge, and whilst it lasts, the patient should be peremptorily prohibited from sexual intercourse: the other annoyance is, that it will frequently happen that a man who has for months perhaps got rid of a troublesome gonorrhoea, has upon every fresh connexion a return of discharge without scalding, probably, or much uneasiness in making water; this may be controlled by injections, but on exercising or drinking wine, and more especially after connexion, it returns and annoys exceedingly all the parties concerned. Here the state of the urethra should be examined with a metallic instrument, large enough to fill the,panal, without, however, putting it too much on tllfetretch. This will often detect considerable irritability of the urethra, which will be removed by the introduction two or three times a week of the metallic bougie. Should this fail, I would recommend the adoption of my tonic plan of treatment. The state now alluded to is what is ordinarily called gleet.





There is, however, another discharge from the urethra, which consists solely of the natural mucus of the canal in excessive quantity, and which is frequently attendant on a general relaxation of the system, either in consequence of excessive venereal indulgence, or of the habit of self-pollution, which has been well called " the scourge of youth and the fruitful harvest of the designing quack." Here, of course, I would strictly urge, as the only means of cure, a total abandonment of the cause, and early application to medical advice.

"When gonorrhoea occurs in persons of a rheumatic disposition, it often attacks the mucous membrane of the eye, as shewn in Plate 13, Figs. 1 and 2, sometimes involving the sclerotic, sometimes even extending to the iris, that is, to the fibrous texture of the organ. Such affections of the eye are to be treated on the ordinary antiphlogistic principles; not a moment, however, is to be lost in applying for medical advice, as the destruction of the organ may take place very rapidly from the nature of the inflammation.

Another of the sequlre of gonorrhoea is rheumatism. This may attack the knee, feet, wrist, or ankles: there is enlargement of the joints in such cases. For treatment—bleeding, purging, with calomel, antimony and colocynth, are the means to be used in the first instance. Then mercury may be used to prevent those changes of structure which might interfere with the motion of the joint—the mouth should be touched. Colchicum has also been found serviceable. As the disease obviously depends on a constitutional cause, mere local applications will not suffice for its removal; in fact, I know of no disease where immediate application for professional assistance is more loudly called for than in gonorrheal rheumatism; and here let me urge on the non-medical reader, by no means to trust to his own judgment, in the adoption of the curative plan of treatment here recommended for the removal of gonorrhoea, or the results might be indeed dangerous—different stages of the affection requiring diametrically opposite plans of treatment; hence the imperative necessity of consulting an experienced practitioner in even the slightest case.





SYPHILIS

The poison of Syphilis, when applied to the skin, produces inflammation and ulceration, and ultimately forms a sore, commonly called chancre, a variety of which are shewn in Plate 1, Figs. 10, 2, 3, and 4,. Chancres most commonly appear on the penis in man, and on the labia in women. They may be observed, however, in other parts. Midwivesj who have attended persons affected with syphilis, have also been found to have them on the hands ahd arms, more especially if there be any abrasion of the cuticle in those parts. Chancre makes its first appearance with a kind of pustule or pimple J its base being more or less inflamed, according to the place where it occurs. If in the glans, the inflamed base is generally small, the surroundihg parts being of rather a compact structure; if, on the contrary, the chancre first appear on the prepuce, the surrounding inflamma* tion is generally great. The chancre, as long as it is in its incipient or papular form, is generally attended with itching; nor, when it becomes an ulcer, is it attended with much pain. The usual Seat of chancre is in the neighbourhood of the frtenum, as, from the nature of the part, the infecting matter can more easily accumulate and incubate there than in any other part.

There are two poisons communicated by venereal intercourse: one the poison of Gonorrhoea, which, falling on a mucous surface, produces from that surface a discharge of matter which is infectious; the other, the poison of Syphilis, which applied to the skin or any surface produces inflammation and ulceration, forming a sore called Chancre; which, being received into the glands of the groin, occasions Bubo, as shown in Plate 11, Fig. 1; and, if allowed to continue without medical aid being had, will soon arrive at its worst and dangeroils form, as shewn in Plate 12, Figs. 1 and 2, and Plate 13, Figs. 1 and 3.





"With respect to the treatment of syphilis, I may just now observe that two reasons influence me in not dwelling on that Subject in a treatise designed almost for popular perusal;—the first is, that any advice I could here give in a general way, would be altogether inadequate to anything like practical application in the hands of a non-professional reader; and the other is, that the dreadful ravages which this frightful disease may commit on the constitution of the unfortunate individual who may become infected with it are so frightful, as entirely to deter me from saying anything on the subject of cure, lest I might, by an unlucky accident, occasion any reader to place confidence in his own treatment, and so prevent him from having recourse to that which should be the sheet-anchor of his hopes—'namely, experienced medical advice; but I cannot refrain from again referring to the modes adopted by some of the first continental surgeons, viz., Ricord, Wallace and Cullerier.

M. Ricord establishes three forms under which the primary venereal sore more commonly makes its appearance; in form of pustule; as a simple ulcer or chancre, then termed by the French syphilographers "chancre d'emblee;" and as an ulcer succeeding to phlegmonous inflammation, which has been seated in a follicle, the cellular tissue, or lymphatic gland, vessel, or ganglion. It is also important here to remark, that the primary syphilitic ulcer has two marked and distinct stages; one of ulceration, the second of reparation or granulation; each demanding a separate and distinct treatment, both locally and constitutionally.

The venereal pustule, if presented to us sufficiently early, and conveniently situated, should be removed by the knife or scissors, or should the fears of the patient prevent this, it is to be opened with the point of a lancet, and the whole internal surface well cauterized with a crayon of the nitrate of silver, and afterwards treated in the manner we shall direct for the management of the primary venereal ulcer.

When we are called upon to treat the simple primary venereal sore during its first stage, or that of ulceration, our first object is to destroy the diseased surface, and reduce it to the condition of a simple sore. This is to be accomplished by means of the nitrate of silver, with which the whole surface of the sore is to be well cauteriz3d, taking care to avoid any parts of the sore, if such there be, where the process of granulation has already commenced.





"It is," says Dr. "Wallace, "during the ulcerating stage of primary syphilis, or when the process of granulation has only partially commenced, that our assistance is for the most part sought; and when the disease is in this stage, there is no doubt on my mind of the propriety or practical utility of immediately applying the nitrate of silver in such a manner, as to destroy the diseased surface. I have treated, over and over again, primary syphilitic ulcers with this caustic, and without it, under circumstances as nearly similar as possible in every respect, and the result has uniformly demonstrated the very great advantages of the former over the latter mode of proceeding. The nitrate of silver should be pointed before using, and then rubbed carefully on every part of the ulcerating surface (previously cleared by poultices or emollient fomentations of all incrustations), until the edge of the ulcer be rendered black, and the surface of a deep ash colour. But should any of the ulcerated surface have entered on the stage of granulation, that portion is to be avoided, and the application of the caustic confined, as much as possible, to such parts of the sore as are still in the stage of ulceration."*

The state of the economy at large demands much attention on the first appearance of a venereal ulcer; and we must here bear in mind the golden rule of Ricord, that the varied appearances of primary venereal sores, and the characters they afterwards assume, depend very much, if not altogether, upon the natural constitution of the patient, and upon the particular condition of his health at the time he imbibes the venereal poison. Thus, in many instances, a primary venereal sore upon the penis produces the most intense local inflammation and fever. Under these circumstances, the patient must be treated upon general principles; he should be bled generally or locally, and the bowels kept freely open;

* Wallace, op. cit. pp. 92-3.





lie should be restricted to the simplest diet, and kept quiet in bed, whilst emollient fomentations or poultices are applied to the sore. The local inflammation and fever are first to be removed, in these cases, before we think of resorting to the nitrate of silver, and should the stage of ulceration be arrested by these means, and the sore assume a disposition to heal, it will not be necessary, or even safe, to use it at all, but the granulating ulcer must be treated in the way we shall presently mention.

Cullerier, in the treatment of the primary venereal sore, confines his patients to bed, and keeps them upon low diet; if there be any local inflammation or fever, he bleeds them from the arm, and covers the sore with a poultice, the opiate cerate, or a strong aqueous solution of opium. All local inflammation and accompanying feyer are to be subdued before the use of the nitrate of silver; and, during the two or three days which are generally spent in its application, the patient should live low, keep his bed if possible, and take daily aperients, unless specially contra-indicated. This plan has the two-fold object of preventing or mitigating the inflammation which may be caused by the application of the caustic, and of preparing the patient for any subsequent general or local treatment the nature of the sore may require.*

During the earlier periods of the local treatment of chancre, M. Ricord particularly insists upon a regimen suited to the constitution of the patient. Under this point of view no exact rules are to be laid down. In some cases a purely antiphlogistic treatment becomes necessary, whilst in others tonics and a nourishing diet are required. The state of the general health requires particular attention, for it must be recollected that, from a bad constitution, or one enfeebled by previously exist



* During those two or three days which are generally spent in the application of the caustic, the patient should be prepared by a purgative, and by regularity in his mode of living, for subsequent constitutional treatment; the "Goulard" lotion may be applied without disturbing the dressing, by immersing the diseased part in it two or three times a day, or by rolling the penis in lint kept wet with this lotion, and covered with oiled silk,— Wallace, op. cit. pp. 97-8.





ing disease, frequently result those complications and severe local affections, so frequently observed during the progress of primary venereal sores.

"Having arrested the progress of ulceration in the primary venereal ulcer, and brought it to the condition of a granulating sore, a change in the plan of treatment becomes necessary, both constitutionally and locally. If mercury be used, now is the time to have recourse to its employ, with the full hope of realizing its most beneficial effects. It is not necessary here to enter into any dis quisition as to the comparative merits or results of the simple and mercurial plans of treatment. I know the balance is immensely in favour of a modified mercurial course, and, holding such an opinion, should be disposed, unless specially contra-indicated, always to recommend to my patient, at this period of his disease, a mild mercurial treatment."—Parker.

I have, in my own experience, seen too many cases, wherein loss of health, loss of comfort, and loss of every enjoyment that could render life worth living for, to countenance, even indirectly, anything like dependence on self for the treatment of a disease, Which, under judicious management, may be dispelled in a week or two, but which, if injudiciously treated, may entail consequences which the patient will have to deplore for years of his life, should life be spared to him. With respect to the prevention of the syphilitic virus, I think, however, I incur neither risk nor responsibility, as practitioner, in recommending the following as the best and most rational means of preventing infection.



AN UNERRING AND NEVER-FAILING SPECIFIC AGAINST VENEREAL INFECTION.

Discovered some years ago, after an extended practice and vast experience in the Treatment of Syphilitic Disease in all its varied forms.

That which long proved the" opprobrium medicorum," the reproach of the faculty, has at length ceased to exist. A True And Certain Pretentive, one that has never been found to fail in even a single instance to prevent infection, even in the most virulent forms of confirmed Venereal Disease, has fortunately been attained. After laborious and indefatigable research, conducted amid circumstances admirably calculated to prove the efficacy and ascertain the high value of this Anti-syphilitic Lotion, the author feels himself fully warranted in confidently recommending the result of his patient and enduring toil to the notice of the public. He has now for some years tested the efficacy of this Preventive, both in his own practice, which has been unequalled in extent, and likewise by the most distinguished medical men having the charge of the venereal hospitals on the Continent, who have, without one exception, borne the fullest testimony to the effectively preventive powers of this Anti-Venereal Lotion. Although the subject is one which the conventional rules of decency will not allow me fully to explicate, still I hope I shall not be charged with endeavouring to corrupt the mind in preference to healing the body; and also that the few short observations I shall make on the subject will sooner entitle me to praise than censure. The details in the preceding chapters will explain to the reader why these diseases are so dreaded by mankind; and, indeed, many would sooner brave the risk of an impure coition than entail on themselves the years of mental and bodily evils resulting from onanism.





I have also endeavoured to show that the crime of Onan is condemned alike by God and man; and although I can offer no excuse for the gratification of the passions, awakened by the age of puberty, still I cannot allow these real calls of nature to yield to the advice of the onanist, which must end in destroying both body and soul, and act in direct opposition to the words in holy writ—" Go forth and multiply."

There are many causes which prevent young men from entering into the marriage state, such as pecuniary circumstances, disinclination to a large family, and friends objections to the beloved object. Now if I can succeed in rescuing one of such as these from the horrors of an attack of syphilis, I feel that I am justified in the course I have adopted, viz., of making the discovery gratuitously known, and I have no hesitation in





expressing my conviction, that ages yet unborn will sooner bless than reproach the memory of him who has enabled them to prevent sooner than cure.

The following is the true prescription for making the Anti-Venereal Lotion, which is not only to be easily procured from any chemist in the known world, but will keep in any climate for years; and I solemnly pronounce it not to contain anything injurious to either sex.



Beaiifoy's Concentrated Solution of the

Chloride of Lime - - - - 2 ounces.

Cold Water - - - - - 8 ounces.

Make a Lotion for External Use only.



METHOD OF USING THE ANTI-VENEREAL LOTION.

To Males.

In four or five hours, or as soon as possible after sexual intercourse, should there be grounds for suspicion of infection, pass water and wash well with soap and water the entire penis, more especially the upper part; then allow the glans penis, uncovered with the foreskin, to remain for five or six minutes at least in a large wine glass, containing two table spoonsful of the anti-syphilitic solution; then afterwards dry the part with some soft linen. It will not be amiss to reapply the solution at the interval of half an hour; and it may also be proper to mention, that as the foreskin is more irritable in some persons than others, if any tingling sensation is felt after applying the lotion, then dilute further with one table spoonful of water.

To Females.

After illicit connexion, should any impurity be suspected, let both the external parts, and particularly the inner surfaces of the organs of generation, be carefully washed with soap and water; then with an India rubber female syringe, while lying on the back with the hips raised, inject three or four times into the passage the anti-venereal Lotion, Diluted With An Equal QuanTity Of Water (warm or cold).





Advice To Both Sexes. It is almost unnecessary to remark, that the greatest cleanliness is required. In the case of excoriations being occasioned by want of cleanliness, or of Daily AbLution, which should ever be recommended to individuals of both sexes, a small portion of the anti-syphilitic fluid, diluted with from four to six parts of water, may be employed as a wash, as well as to keep the generative organs in a state of healthful cleanliness. I consider that women would be saved from a host of incidental diseases did they use the cold sponge bath every morning, and on alternate days inject with cold water, for which purpose Dr. Clarke's Female Syringe is better than any other, for it can be used in a sitting posture, and can be purchased at any chemists for 2s. dd. I would also advise persons using this Lotion to purchase a 2s. Gd. pint bottle of Beaufoy's Concentrated Solution Chloride of Lime, and keep it in the house, so that it can be made at any time ; and I may here remark, it is the most powerful disinfecting liquid known in prevention of fevers or bad smells, and is invaluable in the sick room. N.B.—Males are not to use the Lotion as an injection, and intercourse should be strictly avoided if there is any excoriation, and be particular in asking for Beaufoy's Concentrated Solution Chloride of Lime.

I now beg to subjoin a few of the numerous cases daily being submitted to my notice, and from many years of study employed exclusively in these distressing maladies, combined with the assistance of medicines exclusively of my own preparation, I can with confidence offer hope, energy, and vigour to those whose constitutions have been debilitated from the causes already mentioned, as well as from long residence in warm climates.

NOTICE. N.B.—Patients are respectfully informed, that in any future Edition of this Work, no Case will be published or reverted to, unless with the "Written Consent" of the individual; And The Most Inviolable Secrecy May Be Faithfully Belied On In All ComMunications.





CASE I.

"Dec. 3, 1840. 'Sin, "Having for some years addicted myself to the (what I now call) detestable habit of masturbation, and having, by what I shall ever consider my good fortune, met with your little book, which gives such a graphic and true description of the effects of self-abuse, I must now lay before you a true, and certainly not a varnished tale of my present distressing state, as well as of the line of conduct which led to it. At the age of sixteen, I became an inmate in a seminary where a limited number of pupils was admitted. I here formed an acquaintance with one of my schoolfellows who slept in the same room with me. He initiated me into the practice of self-pollution, in which I am truly sorry to say I quickly became an adept. I practised it for one year and a half, once and sometimes twice a-day. At the time I entered the seminary I had rather a strong propensity for intercourse with women, and had, in fact, indulged about four or five times in that way, and that in such a manner as to be considered by the female as rather a strong and vigorous young man; this was, however, , previous to my entering the seminary. I remained here for six months, and in the vacation returned to my paternal roof. The same female, with whom I at first transgressed, was still in my father's service, and was not slow in again appealing to our former intimacy. I know not how it was, but I felt not so much an aversion to meeting her, as a sort of shame at not being disposed as before. I was completely enervated, and she soon saw it, though she knew not the cause. I returned to school, continued the same practice without the intermission of a day for eighteen months more, lost flesh, became a mere skeleton, could remember nothing, vision quite impaired, found it convenient to use a caue in walking, acquired the gait of an old man, eyes watering, forehead wrinkled; until at length, one evening after a dispute with one of my school-fellows, I became excited, fell into a fit, and when I came to myself, found myself in my bed. After this I had frequent fits, two or three every week, and at length was removed home to my father's. Here I was looked on in the light of one whose intellects were impaired nobody knew how; who must have contracted disease, nobody knew whence. All the medical advice possible was procured for me, from which I derived of course considerable relief. I recovered in a great measure my appetite and digestive powers, which I should have told you were very much impaired. I was able in a great measure to assume a natural attitude in walking; but seminal weakness, and a total absence of anything resembling an erection, still remained. I became sensible of the cause of all my suffering, have had sufficient reason to abandon the cursed practice, and have been living for the last five years in a retired part of the country, taking a great deal of exercise (in a carriage), but still not in a state to mix in society from the frequency of my epileptic attacks; nor yet in a disposition to do so, from the desponding state of mind into which I have been thrown by a consciousness of my impotent condition. I am still young, and there is every chance I trust, under your skilful hands, for the re-establishment of my health. I am the sole heir to a large fortune. May I therefore entreat of you to take my case into consideration, and give me such advice as you may deem requisite. If you think it necessary, I shall go up to London; perhaps, however, you would prefer my living in the country, where I have many advantages of air, exercise, and regularity of living. Expecting to hear from you by return of post, "I am, Sir,





"Yours obediently, &c,

"X. Y.

To J. L. Curtis, E*q."



CASE II.

Perth, May 16, 1843.

"dear Sib,



"I presume you have been compelled to suppose that I have altogether forgotten your kindness to me; but such is not the case. A deep sense of gratitude to you will ever pervade my bosom while I live; and I cannot but regard that day I was privileged to read your invaluable treatise ' Manhood,' as one of the most joyous days of my life.

"My reason in being so long in writing you after having used the medicine you sent me, was, that I might have a full trial of its effects upon mc, in so far as time was concerned; and I am now no more happy to state than you will be to hear, that I look upon myself as cured of a dangerous malady. I have not had three or four emissions for a long time past. To all your directions I am still paying scrupulous attention, and am well assured of the beneficial effects these have had upon my bodily frame.

"You have, my dear sir, conferred upon me a double favor: first, the reduction of your usual fee: that was of itself generous; second, in being the means, under a kind Providence, of rescuing me from a premature grave. I do assure you I feel like another person altogether now, from what I did last summer. A check on a bank, or an order on the post-office, I cannot at present remit you (you know the cause); but it will be my earnest prayer to God that he may long preserve your useful life, and make you instrumental in rescuing hundreds of unfortunate youths from the fatal effects of a disease which you have so minutely described, and so efficaciously cured!!

"In fulsome adulation I cannot indulge, feeling convinced that you are far removed above it. Do regard what I have stated as not expressing the thousandth part of that esteem which I will ever retain for you.

"If you consider the publication of this epistle will be of any benefit, you have my free permission to insert it in your work, £





but hoping you will conceal my real name and address, I i:a«»

with every sentiment of gratitude and esteem, ..., hi !dofa

"My dear Sir, '. ' " has

"Faithfully yours,l on&

"J. L. Curtis, E»'i." « . i iyqijiq

-i bii-e

CASE in.

"Newcastle-on-Tvae, November, lt*13. "sir,

"A few days since I procured a copy of your truly valuable little work, entitled 'Manhood,' and having perused it, I felt convinced it was my duty to apply to you as a patient. I very much regret that I have not at present an opportunity of a personal interview, but should an opportunity offer I shall avail myself of it. Since reading your book I have really felt like a condemned criminal. I have attained the age of thirty-nine years; I have been guilty of the great sin of self-abuse i I blame no one, as I believe the act was first suggested by my own depraved nature, when I was about the age of ten years, and from that time until the age of eighteen years, I practised the sin at intervals, varying from two or three days apart, and occasionally abstaining from it so long as two or three weeks or more; I believe I did not fairly suspect the evil of the practice until that age; I then made an effort to leave it off, but always failed after a struggle of a few weeks. About that time I began first to be troubled with an involuntary discharge of semen. Prom the age of eighteen to the age of thirty-nine I have not been able to break off the wicked practice, and still suffer from involuntary discharge, although sometimes I have been several weeks without; but latterly they have been shorter intervals. I am a single man; about five years ago I bad a disappointment in love; I never had intercourse with a female. I am an active partner in a coal-mine; I reside with my partner in the country; he is a near relation; and he is a married man, with a family of two boys. I have always been very sparing in the use of all intoxicating drinks, and for near the last two years I have totally abstained from them, in hopes of the better being able to overcome the above-named besetting sin. I am an early riser, my time of rising being a quarter past five in winter, and a quarter before five in summer; I breakfast at seven o'clock, dine at one, and take tea at seven; no supper, and never take animal food in the evening; and I retire to rest at ten o'clock, I hase always been used to take walking exercise freely, occasionally from ten to fifteen miles per day. I am thankful to-say my general health and appetite are pretty good, excepting occasional headache, which is sometimes severe, and frequent costieeness in the bowels; i In statute I am about five fleet ten lnc&es;imy weight about eleven, stone; moderately stout; rather light complexion, Latterly, I hav* felt more &tfgu».tlian formerly after a long walk. I beg you will excuse my having been so very tedious. i ,,-»)

"I inclose the fee of ill, and nhould you bit the means, in the hands of a long-suffering and merciful Providence, of rescuing} mo Hi





from the vile' habit and its sad effects, I shall indeed trwe a'large debt of gratitude. Be so kind as to forward tne: yttufkind''advice, and what you think most requisite, at your earliest convenience, and I shall be most happy to remit you what you may think proper to charge. I shall be very glad to answer any questions and give any information you may require. "I am, Sir,

"Your very humble patient,

"A. Z. "ToMr. Curtis.

"Address ' A Z., Post-office, Newcastle-on-Tyne.'"



CASE IV.

"Liverpool, March 29, 1844. "sir, "The critical and pressing circumstances in which I find myself placed, oblige me urgently to solicit your immediate attention to this my communication. I shall give as briefly as possible the history of my ease. I am now in the forty-fifth year of my age, and have never been married. When a young man, I lived in the same house and in the same family with a young female, with whom, after some time, I became very intimate. Not being disposed to marry from the insufficiency of my income. I prevailed on this young person to allow me certain liberties. In fact, I contrived eventually to sleep with her every two or three nights in the week. From my very great respect for her and for her family, I was determined to avoid the ordinary results, so I always took care to retire from the embrace before completing the act. This intercourse continued for two or three years, and then ceased by her. leaving the part of the country. From the fancied impunity which attended this my first attempt, I continued to act with similar precaution with several other females. At length; after adopting this method tor some years, I began to find myself less vigorous in my embraces, and less inclined, because less able to repeat them. I also experienced pains in the' lower part of the spine—gleety discharge, occasional dizziness in the head, and when at stool, emissions of semen. At first, and for a considerable time, I took no notice of these things, and did not at all suspect the causes which could have given'Tige to them. "J happened, however, to read in a medical work, some time since^ an' allusion mode to these symptoms which I have Stated that'I ft/It,' and some (certainly otjeenre) reference-to impeffisctoorjion :anft premature secession fromthe female as their probableeause; I then consulted your book, and found that the real cause t>{ my symptoms which have since, by the way, become much aggravated, was to be referred entirely to the habit in which I had beten for so many years indtrigmg. As I wish to be as minute aspossibleifti ithfsi'mycomrmTOlcatfcm to you, I find brevity imp«jBrtble.ri'iI'tfeereferBtniiSt speak* lititle in detail': EVtttheilweithrtejteJWs; tl'**lpe*i8nce-ia,'SOr« of'tremor under met^agilat4o*,»tolh«ristaeh''is)fltl»tion be occasioned byord?nary busiaesdp amt-a/rnBrchant) or by venereal feelings. This tremor is only occasional, but its recurrence is very frequent* especially**? late; ilam becoming less confident every day. ofany virile powers^ for I find tlrem much deteriorated. I have livediia bachelor up to'my present time—have never been diseased with Syphilis; and have now a very excellent opportunity of an extremely good match with a young lady somewhat, nay, con? siderably younger than myself—one thing only deters me from marrying—debility of the genital organs, and premature emission of semen. I have endeavoured to make my case as open to you as possible. Is it within your power, or the power of medicine, to restore me to anything like adequate strength to consummate the act of coition? I am nervous—I am afraid. Write tome as soon as possible your opinion, and if you think medicine can Telieve me, send it to me immediately. The occasion is urgent—





that must plead my apology. I enclose you a draught for £ .;

if you restore me to the state in which a husband is expected to be, I shall gladly acknowledge it, and remunerate you handsomely. . .1

"Tours obediently, b'

"X. Trtii

.- ''.-it



"April ZSlIl, 1841.'

"Dear Sir, . i-i^

"I have, I know, worried and teazed you very much—but yon know too much of the wretched state of a man's mind, circumstanced as I was, till I consulted you, to feel annoyed at my unceasing importunities and interrogatories. I now find myself completely set to rights—everything as it should be—healthy and vigorous. I no longer feel any delicacy in undertaking the duties and responsibilities of a husband—from your assiduous and truly scientific directions and medicines, I feel I may add, those sweet responsibilities of a parent. 1 am to be married in two or three .days. Ought I not continue your last bottle a little longer? You are the first to whom I send wedding favours-— and that before the solemnization of the marriage. I send you

an enclosure of a draught for £ for the excellent draughts

you have sent me. I never can repay you for your kind indulgence to all my pettishness and over anxieties, but, if of any service, you are at perfect liberty to publish the case—of course omitting my name and address. -. iiei'i\

- .' H-- "Ever your obliged, iniii -> .' ."XiiiYj'-i.'!

"J. i... Curtis, Eeq." „.-.' i , . .; ... ,rgL...lT

A',.- :'' ''.i i.i i-i '''' 'i in T.ii .

CASE V.

"March 1,1841. Sir, !] ;!.-.'.i

"Having noticed the advertisement of your valuable book entitled 'Manhood,' I immediately ^rVMrMit,having for Some time suspected that I was one of the victims of the heinous «rime of which it treats. I have been addicted to the vice of selfpollution since my 18th year, being at first, totally ignorant of its guilt or its awful consequences; and have practised it, in secret, once or twice a day, for nearly seven years, during -which time I began to feel rather uneasy at times, without knowing the cause. At times I thought I was wrong; but i having an ardent desire for the female sex, I considered I was acting less sinfully and less injuriously to myself and others, by addicting myself to this practice. Having oae day accidentally looked into Culpepper's 'English Physician,' I met a passage which soon cleared up my doubts on my conduct, anddetermined me on abandoning for ever the abominable habit; a resolve to which, though difficult at first, I am now determined on firmly adhering.





"In the early part of my life I worked in the fields, contributing to the support of an aged and sickly mother; but a friend of our family kindly took me into his school, and taught me to read and write; and I am now placed in a surveyor's office, as clerk and book-keeper. I have never had any connexion with a female in my life. My state during the past year I shall now describe. I have experienced great depression of mind, bordering, indeed, on a propensity to suicide. I have had violent pains in the head, with a noise in the ears, from which I have been relieved by violent bleeding at the nose; dimness of sight; weakness of memory; frightful and lascivious dreams, accompanied with a seminal discharge; the latter occurs about once or twice in a fortnight; frequent desire to pass water, which is occasionally very high-coloured; pains in various parts, especially in the back, and lower parts of the abdomen; habitual costiveness. I am now twenty-seven years of age, rather tall and thin, am temperate in my diet, and also in my drink; carefully avoid aleoholie liquors from their irritating influence on the urinary passages; troubled with flatulence; am of a very irritable temper of late. "' '!- ,

"Having now stated my case, I place myself in your hands altogether. Trusting in your "honourable secrecy, I enclose you £l, requesting your kind attention to my case, and anxiously expect to hear from you soon.

"I am your humble patient, v. . "A. B."

Remarks. — The symptoms detailed in this case are strikingly characteristic of the effects of self-abuse. This ease may, iu fact, be taken as a general representative of all such cases. Though the patient is now but little more than eight weeks under my care, ho is nearly restored to perfect health, aud to the full enjoyment of his virile powers.

CASE VI.

A ,threatening of'pubionary Consumption from excessive Venertj.

W. G* aged twenty»n>e years, of rather delicate frame, a clerk ia a large comoaefeiil establishment, had been always of very regular habits in every respect -had been residing in one of the outletsot London forithelaat two years, and about twelve month* befor«wsjWibjj!ttjwbieh, was'iatheinoirth of December last,he: married S' young widow in whose bouse he had been lodging* and' • mtmuedtoindulge very ftieely in the pleasures of the marriage* !'«-il fur the first nine months without feeling any bad etfectej .ilmut Uiis period, however, he began to lose flesh very perceptibly, and to feel great lassitude on the least exertion; his appetite foV food also began to fail him; his sleep became disturbed and rai* refreshing, bowels became constipated; in fact, all the symptoms indicating a general deterioration of all the functions, both bodily and mental, began to show themselves; his sight became impaired, as also his memory; in fact, his mind was so absorbed in the one engrossing idea, namely, that of the gratification of the venereal appetite, now increased beyond all bounds, that he became unable to devote the proper degree of attention to his ordinary occupation. He now also began to complain of pain in the upper part of the right lung, and of considerable difficulty of breathing on ascending an eminence; these symptoms having continued for two or three weeks, he began to perceive a sense of heat in the top of the fauces, as also a saltish taste in the mouth, a little after which he began to spit blood of a florid red colour and frothy appearance. Being alarmed at this, and having for some time suspected that the cause of his present impaired health was his inordinate indulgence in venery, he called on me, and detailed the history of his case, as I have now given. On examining his chest I observed some dulness on percussion in the upper portion of the right lung, immediately under the clavicle; the respiratory murmur was also absent from this part; in every other part of the chest the respiratory function seemed all right; the action of the heart was somewhat irregular, being very much hurried occasionally, and from the slightest cause.





I directed that he should forthwith abstain from all sexual intercourse instanter, a condition imperatively required for the re-establishment of his health; I also prescribed a peculiar diet, and such medicines as the nature of the case seemed to indicate. After being about three weeks under treatment, he began perceptibly to recover his strength, his appetite returned,, as also his sleep, the pulmonary symptoms gradually declined, the- haemoptysis had not yet returned after the first week he aacj bqen under my care, the pulmonary tissue was now perfectly pervious to air, and percussion elicited the natural healthy soundf, over the chest; in fact, after being under treatment, in all aboirt, six weeks, he was entirely restored to health. Apprehensive.: however, lest he might return to his former inordinate indulgence, I recommended his leaving London for a month or so and returning to his native place, which was in some part of Scott land; he has done so, and it is but three days ago since t received a letter from him announcing the perfect restoration of his health and strength, and his intention of again resuming his former, commercial employment.

.bMiii,iiint d'lum {'I ,' '&t, -' .





'iSemarks.—This was a case where coflsidfertftIB (JJffiteutty presented itself; a patient exhausted in strength With borefy^erioug airecti< m of the lung, for the relief of which daphstrflg measures appeared necessary. It is evident, however,! that 10'soeh'treatment was carried to any extent in this ease; -"ihfe'^afiewt must sink; thus, then, I had to restore strength; arid|iat"iheii!ame time, to combat inflammatory symptoms of ratheri art' alAMtting nature. By closely watching from day to day the -ef!ects'of my remedies, I finally succeeded in gradually restoring the strength, and at the same time in keeping down inflammation by the local application of counter-irritants.

From my extensive experience, I have good reason to know that many, very many cases of pulmonary consumption, which the ordinary practitioner sets down to the account of an here* ditary taint, have their origin in excessive venery, as also in self-abuse; anything, in fact, which reduces the strength con» alterably below par, and keeps it so for any length of time, will ultimately induce whatever disease there may be any lurking predisposition to. It is unnecessary to say that the treatment of snch disease so brought on, must be considerably modified by the exciting cause, whether this cause be excessive indulgence, or self-abuse.



CASE VII.

Night Blindness from Self-pollution. t.i... .'..



M. V., aged eighteen, complains that he is blind at night; can barely see stars round a candle; feels weakly, but has no pain or sickness of any kind; is very thin and emaciated; pupils a little dilated, iris slothful; countenance pale; tongue moist, and, flesh, as usual in such cases, soft aud ilabby; pulse one hundred, and feeble; the functions of the bowels and kidneys well performed; states that he has been practising self-abuse for the last four years; and has often indulged in it four times a day, but latterly not so often; has nocturnal emissions; has observed the blindness creeping on him for the last year; sees perfectly well during the day. 1 submitted this person to the appropriate treatment, and after four weeks his digestive powers became perfectly re-established; he acquired the power of seeing objects at night, and persevering iu the treatment enjoined, he improved so much, that he at length was able to read and work at night. . The same remarks may be made on this case, as on the preceding; and though it may appear, at first sight, that the digestive functions were not here affected from the beginning, but rather that the pernicious effects of the habit were first and solely directed against the nervous system; still, when we recollect the emaciated state of the patient, it will at once strike us, that the function of nutrition, the ultimate end and aim of digestion, was very much impaired.





CASE VIII.

Chelleuham, March 14,1844.

"Sla, ', .„...., , ., , -x:-:

"I have hail an opportunity of rending your truly interesting work, entitled 'Manhood,' and deplorable as my state is, at present, I have still a hope that something may be done for me—a hope I never would have entertained, but for the striking cases of cure contained in the interesting Appendix to your work. I am now approaching fifty years of age—of a robust frame, and good appetite. I sleep well, and all other matters go on very fairly with me—but I am very nervous. I feel a weakness in my limbs, more especially in my knees when walking, and occasionally an annoying dizziness in. the head—seminal emissions, both at night and at stool—an incontinence of urine -constipation of bowels, and diarrhoea afterwards —with these I am of late much annoyed. Now for the history of my case. I am, as I already told yoa, nearly fifty years of age. I have never married—but I havei indulged very much in venereal enjoyments. It was a habit of mine to indulge frequently in the erect posture—whether this contributed to my present distressing state I know not— I leave h to you. Within the last three years I scarcely feel a desire for intercourse; my back is weak; my lower limbs are tottering like those of a man of seventy—great incontinence of urine, and a stricture into the bargain. I once contracted a clap, from which I thought I was cured very soon; but after it I always had a contraction in the stream of urine. Now I have a very good opportunity of marrying—hut, under the circumstances, ought I? I shall expect an answer from you as to the practicability of a cure. You know my case from the unconnected hints I have given. May I solicit an answer as speedy as possible?

Tours, &c„

"S. P.". , ,.,

« April 23rd, 1844.

"My Dear Sib,

"I was an infidel in the powers of medicine up to this—I now recant, as in duty bound—you have made me a convert. My health is re-established—the tremors and shaking, about which I have so tormented you, are gone, entirely gone, and I hope never to return - you have restored me to youth again. Now, my dear sir, I happen to possess the means of remunerating y;on» not adequately, but I hope gratefully; so enclose you a draught for

£ ,of which I beg your acceptance, and

./li'-x1l, :i.iisii I: "Believe me, , r, t..K^ \f i

"Sincerely and gratefully yours,

'' ',; ' i.iK! 'IJ/'"i I!.. :,, .r. , r\%T ':o

"P.S. I am to be married noxt1 TThttt-sdayv So sead' me on© more bottle. I mean the little otte.'6'1 'ri" " >'-, -/'d.-i -',ui inu!a .<





CASE IX.

Amaurosis from inordinate Venereal Indulgence.



Six months since, I was consulted by a gentleman from the Country, thirty-six years of age, rather under the middle size, Aomewhat slight, yet muscularly formed; countenance somewhat flushed, but looking drowsy; he complains of sense of fulness in the head and of dimness of sight, which has now proceeded to such an extent, that he occasionally walks with his hands stretched before him to avoid being knocked by persons meeting him; some time since, he actually walked into a river that passe* through the village where he lives. The pupils are very much dilated, especially the left; the iris sluggish under the influence of the light; the conjunctiva and sclerotic coat are deeply injected; some dyspepsia; bowels costive; pulse 90 and natural. Had been put under the action of mercury about four months since, had also been blistered in the head, and had had a seton in the neck; he fancied his sight was improved by the salivation; but it became as bad as ever in a few days after—the seton in the neck fell out, and he is now in a worse state than ever.

This person distinctly states, that his complaint is traceable to his having married some two or three years since, and to his having resorted to unnatural practices, for the purpose of exciting his venereal desires oftener than nature required.

Having enjoined absolute refraining from all venereal indulgence until his perfect recovery, I undertook the treatment of the case, and in the space of three weeks, I sent him home perfectly restored to the full enjoyment of his sight, and in good health in every respect.

This is a striking instance of the sympathetic connexion which exists between the organ of vision and the genital organs; and has been, as we have already seen, seized on by the Phrenologists as a powerful argument in favour of their system. They say, that such a result of defective vision arising from self-abuse, can be explained by the fact of the root of the optic nerves lying so very close to the cerebellum, and to that part especially of it where the seat of sexual propensity is placed.



CASE X.

Congestion of the Cord and Paralysis of the lower ejcti entity, from excessive Venereal Indulgence.

J. M., aged thirty-two years, of rather a full habit of body, and in the habitual enjoyment of good health, complained of paralysis of the lower extremities, with almost total loss of power or restraint over the sphincters, states, that he has been in this state for about-a. fljpntlw On.being questioned as to his mode and habits of living, he sajd that he was engaged a go- d deal in traveling; that be enjoyed excellent health, with good appetite, until the last six or eight weeks, when he began. .fa> complain of pains in the lumbar region, incontinence of urine, loss of appetite, dizziness of head, listlessness and indifference, and reluctance to exertion. On being questioned more minutely, he said he has been in the frequent habit of intercourse with a female, several times in the day occasionally, and that he ahvaj's preferred the erect posture in the performance of the act. On running my fingers along the sides of the vertebrae, I found that considerable pain was felt in this part; whence I naturally suspected that the membranes of the cord, or the substance of the cord itself, was in a state of congestion. On the application of antiphlogistic measures, such as cupping along the spine, &c, I saw all the symptoms gradually subside, and the patient's health perfectly restored by the use of my tonic restorative medicines.





CASE XI.

"sir. "A perusal of your excellent work 1ms induced me to hope you will be able to render me some assistance; I accordingly feel the greatest confidence in submitting the following case for your opinion and advice. I am twenty-four years of age. At the age of fifteen I was induced to indulge in the habit of selfabuse, which I practised unremittingly once or twice a day for six years. Though I have entirely given up the practice for the last two years, I am, however, suffering from its cruel effects, lining the time above mentioned I led an extremely regular life, never drank much spirituous liquor, nor had I intercourse with females. In fact, so timid was I, that I had not courage enough to address a woman on the subject. I was remarkably short and slender; and every morning when I awoke, a yellowish matter which had issued from my mouth during the night stained the pillow, J constantly complained of determination of blood to the head and of great nervousness. My sight and memory beg^n to fail me. I felt pain over the abdomen after each act, but was still ignorant of the enormity of the vice and of its dire effects. In the spring of 1839, whilst at church, I had a rush of blood to the head, and fainted. I was brought home and had leeches applied to the back. The medical attendant hinted at the practice of self-pollution as the cause of the affection. This opened my eyes to the truth, though I concealed it. My sufferings, mental and bodily, now became dreadful. My intellectual faculties became entirely confused. I now became a mere skeleton, My eyes were quite dead, and bluish streaks were perceptible below my eyelids. I constantly staggered in walking and frequently was near falling. I had constant dizziness in the head, and a host of symptoms principally from the head, for which no one could account. For shame, I did not reveal my condition, till being affected with a pain in the chest, 1 consulted a medical man, and was somewhat relieved. My accumulated sufferings now brought on a profound melancholy. Travelling Being now recommended, I came up to London, where change of scene and plenty of exercise have worked a great improvement in my condition; still, however, I have severe sufferings, which I beg leave to enumerate to you. I have involuntary emissions of semen both when asleep and when awake, in the company of females or before a fire. I am affected with constant dizziness in the head. My sense of hearing as well as that of sight is impaired; a sort of mist before my eyes—a kind of undulating pain in tbe chest. I am entirely incapacitated for sexual intercourse. A constant feeling of terror is constantly hanging over me. Such is as accurate an account as I can give of my present and former state; may I therefore solicit your immediate reply to my distressing case. my own dep^adatisyv. Now I can hold up my head like a man, can feel like a man, and have good reason to know that I can act like a *aan^-"fap which I am in a fair way of being made parentally. to pay. I would like to know whether it wilMW' neoessaryifor me to continue the use of the medicine any lotigert'1 The »m»n bof tie in the last packet seemed to be a clincher. "Jtfwoundup all my energies, like the works of a clock. In fact:,**: seemed to act on me like magic.





"lam, &c, &c,

"J.C."

Remarks,— If ever a subject presented himself for exemplifying all the dire effects of self-abuse, it was this individual. The order too, in which the disastrous consequences of this habit were observed to follow each other, is very remarkable, and in perfect accordance with the pathological principles advanced in the previous part of this work; in fact, this one case would serve as an illustration of all I have said on the subject. First, the patient was observed to be remarkably short and slender. Here we see how the practice of self-pollution, by disturbing and destroying in the first instance the functions of digestion, impaired the growth and nutrition of the body. The next ravages committed by it were on the nervous system, and first on the brain; the sense of vision being impaired was a consequence of this; the disturbance of the nervous system was also evinced by the determination of blood to this organ. The failure of memory too, and of all the intellectual faculties, the state of melancholy, so perceptible in this case, are further proofs of the destructive influence of this habit,—nor was the brain the orily part of the nervous centres affected; the spinal system also became deeply implicated, as proved by the wandering pains in the chest and over the abdomen; the staggering gait of the patient, the state of muscular debility into which he was thrown, the involuntary seminal discharges, the total inability of the patient to perform the generative act, are still further instances vS the melancholy effects of the habit of masturbation.

^fter impressing on this patient the absolute necessity of abandoning this habit, which according to his own account he had hiiAself done, f undertook the treatment of the case; and by' prescribing such medicinal and dietetic rules as the complicated nature of the patient's condition seemed to require, I succeeded, in about two months, in restoring the patient to the eiijjoTmeot of perfect health. ,' ,

\m Uavoi Jon bib 1 ,'!mnAi lol .wene !.': .-' fv> ,,,., :1-'::I"





-n!in? idt ol miloi'! n 't! ij;is[q8*"'-j4tl''" .'' !::,a v' "'l^rt ','''

f. O.B:j igfed29,'of a strong make, originally had been a «Wflf athletic hTanY blrf froth long illness, is now become very iriiicW debifitirtetf. Ttithe year 1894, he contracted a syphilitic taiiw? The fiYirt symjitom 'was a' chancre, and then a bubo appeared ii'jf die groin. He "put himself under medical treatment, and took'* great quantify df mercury. During the time he was under the' mercurial influence he was exposed to wet and cold; and then became affected with pains in the limbs. From them, however, he obtained relief by the use of warm baths and other appropriate means, and Continued in the enjoyment of what may be called merely tolerable health for about a year. About this time he began to feel some uneasiness in the throat, and considerable pain in swallowing either solids or liquids; he also complained of acute pains in the shins, all along the sharp edge of the tibia, and of constant and annoying head-aches. At this juncture of affairs I saw him for the first time. On examining the throat I found at the back part of the fauces an extensive ulcer, the appearance of which eloquently bespoke its syphilitic origin—it was jagged, rugged, and uneven—it seemed as if it had been "dug out with a spade"—the scalp, when even but slightly touched. Was exquisitely painful; as were also the shin bones; there was total loss of rest at night, high fever, and great exhaustion, all relish for food of any kind being totally extinct; there were nodes also along the tibia. Here was a bad case of secondary Syphilis—the patient, though originally of a good constitution, was now broken down by long and intense suffering. He now also began to complain of a tearing cough, which gave me not very serious alarm, as, on examining the chest, I found no signs of pulmonary disease. The cough I therefore saw was occasioned by the extension of the syphilitic ulceration to the larynx and its cartilages. There were also symptoms of hectic fever beginning to manifest themselves; this too was explicable on the supposition that the larynx was involved; the pain felt oil pressing the larynx, and the alteration in the patient's voice, were further' Connrmatory of this opinion. T undertook thfe case, unfavourable^ it certainly was, and after about eight Weeks'' assiduous attention, I brought the patient round, and he was able to go to the Country; after this time I saw him but once a week', Wtl after about five or six weeks' residence in the country, he was so completely restored to health and strength, as to be able to resume business. He is at this moment as hale and strong a man as ever. '!i»n'aa"

fVi'iil.V. .' n-I i|«ii. , rtJ L:s.. , ~i,/ I ,:. ''. ,!. / '.' ,v..i' nT"

.:'.../.-,. !iaii.n, ,,,,.. ,,..e.as"E xjrn:-''"" „,'' ,'-"", 'r11 ii..!- vii.',}.,'!t i ." i..-i,,n ii. Ii,,,,-rnT-in'i, -in i, -,-,..!—'-t ,'/!, < uo'{

-tili j, iiiil/. ,-iir1 !ilo . nii 'i -iii f,'aiiUibestori Sspterabox 7,1»48.!'

m, ,.,'," Sift,,





the habit of Onanism, and being myself a victim to the same vicious indulgence, I have summoned sufficient courage to make application to you to solicit the benefit of your skilful advice. Imtn now twenty-seven years old, am a cabinet-maker by trade, and was led into the habit of Onanism by a fellow apprentice. For the last ten years I have indulged in the habit, on an average, five or six times every week; the consequences have been very marked and striking. I am at present very much debilitated, and wasted away in flesh. My appetite is become extremely bad, though at first it became actually voracious after I first commenced the practice. I can with difficulty digest the lightest food; my limbs are extremely feeble, and I never feel by any chance the least desire for sexual intercourse; indeed, such an idea never enters my head, though at the age of sixteen I was rather forward in that particular. I am also unable to apply my mind for any time to any one train of thinking; and as for memory, I have scarcely any. I also labour under an incontinence of urine; and, both during sleep, and when at stool, I am troubled with seminal discharges. Under this state of things, I applied some months ago to a medical practitioner of some repute in this place, but after taking medicines to no end, as prescribed by him, I find not the least improvement in my condition. I have, since reading your book, almost entirely discontinued the ruinous habit which has been the cause of all my sufferings and sorrows. Yet, so inveterate has been my addiction to the habit, that I am still dragged into the gratification of it, but very, very rarely. I find my intellect sometimes in a very strange state; indeed, to be candid] I am sometimes afraid my reasoning faculties are more or less impaired. I trust this exposition of my present feelings and state of health will lead you into a knowledge sufficient to enable you to undertake my case. My sole hope of ever becoming a member of society rests' on you. The friend of mine, who directed me to you, is now so perfectly re-established in health and strength, that I entertain strong hopes that my case is not .entirely desperate. Certainly he was not so bad as I now am.

"May I beg of you to take my distressing and pitiable case into your consideration, and to send me word what I must do. Hoping to hear from you as soon as you conveniently can, . -9Anii

'jur erf baa "Iam,Sn% idj .nojMi..Wi i

& 9yno jud mid "Your obedient Servant-,





"I beg to return to you my warmest thanks for the patience yo#have had in listening to my many tales of woe, and restoring n»to the possession of the happiness I now feel. "Believe me,

"Yours, very gratefully,

"A. B. "To J. L. Curtis, Esq." '- i.i

CASE XIV. i-.m

"Liverpool, January 24,184*/'"d "Silt, .' nt

"One of the most pitiable objects that ever addressed yoo/ now claims your mercy and attention. At the age of twelve years, a servant girl in our house, with whom I slept, was in the habit of indelicately handling me; and from the state of intense irritation into which she threw me, I was forced into a compliance with her desires, and so had connexion with her almost every day. This went on for two or three years, when, from the indulgence at so early a period becoming now habitual with me, I began to indulge in a similar manner with the common women of the town. My friends were sadly annoyed at my wretched appearance—I was almost wholly unfit |br business—my mind was constantly bent on sexual intercourse, and so much did I indulge in it, that the very sight of a female caused me a seminal discharge. When at stool, also, I constantly have had these: discharges.

." I am now twenty-four years of age, but sadly debilitated. lino longer approach a woman. I feel satiated, or disgusted with the sight of one my appetite is nearly gone—mydigestrvepowetsSfc are greatly impaired—and I feel no interest whatever in what iSti passing around me; and what is still stranger, the hair ofdujtii head has fallen off in a great measure, so that I am almost bald —strangers take me for forty years of age. Having perused you>« book very lately, a ray of hope darted through my mind thatiln might find some relief in your judicious treatment. Can-you d0.s anything for me? In the hope that you will undertake my ease,r: I- enclose you your fee of a sovereign, which shall be repeatediwhen necessary; only do not delay, I implore you, in writinato? me. My only hope is now in your skill and experience. If'thatd fail me, I have not a hope left. Dp then, take pity on me,.as:Ianin nearly broken hearted. ,jA -:..:, -:. i 1 .« - X .-.v .,.».1 ilno «'..! A ..; ..ir -. "jam, Sir, .y.ovr-B n-'hif; -i!a" iavi'- hnJi "viil i-. ii .-,:. i-ii-: '.„i "-Your unfojtunataiGfiQrrespondeiltvauiJu I

. :'i:- .l J ,-- "M*"3J.'! .ii

"J. L. Curtis S <j.Stc."





,iwm B -ofil fuwil vffl cfii btoii nno t «v*$vei^liiim&%"lt!&'.ir', iot, Imdjubsir* ., i ..,, 'P:'i t'oog 9Tna tins .asmA awil&n nuu yft'.Ja my last communication I stated iitoityon ttiati'the mosi unfavourable of the symptoms were gene; Tthat !my appetite was re-established; the seminal dischargesiinimyisleepiandat stool» w$re gone; and that my strength and eaiergyiweriaperfectly reestablished. I have now the pleasing duty, to state that my baldness is very much diminished, so that Ihave given' up the idea altogether of wearing a wig. My desire for sexual intercourse is perceptibly returning, so that I now stand it fair' chance of being a better man than I ever was. Oh, Sir! what a lesson I could read to those unfortunate youths who indulge in excessive venery at a premature period of youth. How dreadful have been my sufferings of both mind and body. Thanks to your unremitting and assiduous care, however, my health is now better than I remember it ever to have been.-TM

"I should very much like to have another packet of your medicine, as I am obliged W go, 6 considerable distance from home in ten or twelve days hence, and shall not return for three months. Any advice you may consider necessary, you will be kind enough to impart to me m your next. "I am, Dear Sir,

"Your truly grateful patient, ,firIi . "M.

,"J. L.Curtis, Esq., &<:.,• . . li .i. , ,





CASE XV.

"Birmingham, Nov. 23,184a. "sir T'!;

"Having just obtained from a friend the perusal of your work entitled 'Manhood,' I wish to consult you on my present very distressed state of body and of mind. I have now been for some months a married man, indeed for almost six months, and' during all that time I have not been atlle to effect a consummation of the marriage. Whether I am to impute this, my inability, to mind or to bodily weakness; I cannot say. PerKapa when 1 have stated my case from its comtofehcemeht you Will b* able to judge. About the age of fourteen, I contracted the habif of masturbation from a young d'cquaintarice of mine, who initiated me into it. At first I felt ho' metihventenee from it, but after'indulging in the habit for five' or" six months, I began to evinceIgreattervousness. My knees seefried to bend under ma wbewtwalking, my hands had a sort of tremor, my voice assumed a soilt of ttfemulousness, which anianed all toy friends, I could no longer reeoflect the details of matters entrusted to me, such as Messages; &e. '-I still continued the practice, hot for a moment suspecting' it* mischievous effectSi ''1 tibw'was readily put put of breith' on making any ex&rrioiii'' 'I'sometimeS felt symptoms> resembling those of palsy itflWy lower Extremities') but these Were only temporary. I went on this way, indulging in this habit twice and sometimes thrice a-week, um514b6ut a year since, when I attain<^my,^«ffiyAfst^#8r\!'i" I,Jw*aS then introduced to an intereifing young girl to whom my friencb wished me to get





marrie&i Though hot very desirous of this change, yot as ^there were coasideralriei advantages attached to it, I consented. 4,bw)q this period I discontinued, t)ie habit of masturbation very much, nay, almost entirely. Still I laboured under great debility, and inability for bodily exertion; I found also that the slightest contact with a female caused in me an almost instantaneous emission of semen. I should have stated before this, that I Jiad nerer intercourse with a female. As the friends both of the young girl and myself were anxious to have us married, I was determined on mating a trial with some woman; when I did so I had an emission on the very first contact, and before intromission of the penis. I became alarmed at this, and entirely diffident of myself; this diffidence and distrust stuck to me to the time of my. marriage. I have frequently attempted coition with my wife but have never succeeded. I am frightened, as it were, on making the attempt—the erection is very imperfect; a discharge of thin fluid takes place in an instant, and here I am, after six months marriage, totally unfit to perfect an entrance, ashamed of my , wife and of myself, and absolutely in a state of despair. lam' perfectly well able to remunerate you for your services, if you think they could be available in my case. May I then beg of" you to answer this, my application, at your earliest convenience, as you must see the distressing circumstances in which I am placed. I enclose a sovereign, and will, on hearing from you, continue the fee.

"I am, Sir,

"Your obedient Servant,

"J. V.

"To J. L. Cu'tis, Esq."



"Birmingham, Dec. 22, tStS. "dear Sin, "I write for one more package of the medicine, and in spirits widely differing indeed from those under which I first addressed you. The tremor of my hands, and feelings of lassitude under which I laboured for so long a time, are now entirely gone, but what has been of still greater importance than all is, that I have been able to perform the duties of a husband", repeatedly, and most perfectly within the last four nights. TheU feeling of terror is now almost entirely gone. The last package has tended in a most extraordinary manner to check the almost* instantaneous emission which annoyed me so much before:!? Indeed, within the last six days, I enjoy more strength aad'd vigour than I ever remember to have possessed. I am, in faeU&i: man, and feel so. I can look with a degree of confidence into the face of my kind wife, of whom I was before altogether ashamed. In fact, Sir, I feel towards you, for your extraordinary cure of me, beyond what I can express. As I should Tery much wish to continue the medicine for some time longer, I enclose the usual fee, with a request, that you will be so good, as to write to me once more, as some advice, may be still necessary i regarding my future manner of living.





KI am, Sir, with a deep sense of gratitadeilfoiriiffle mtostiiavr'

pbrtant service that can be bestowedvon » humlatai bfeiBgy 'i iA

f" '" Your Very/ Sincere frWdJ" '".'rI <"•»

i"4' J. L. Curtis, Esq. .""'ri ./'' '<J't"''l i"'t V1'i1idJiiii

w' ''. 'it. iin ni ]i'".,". i 'iiuiii-i't Ii rfii// loiiJ/io^

"You are at perfect liberty to make any use of my 'comrnUtfiiifiJ'tions you may please, the name, of course, &c, being carefullyconcealed." '''■''" '"R.~- «

Remarks on the preceding Cases.—In the three eases'ini-' mediately preceding, we have striking instances of the mischievous consequences of the abuse 01 the genitail organs. In J. lYs case the habit of masturbation had Dcen carried on for about seven years, and the effect was a total incapacity for coition; the entire system, both muscular and vascular, were in the most debilitated and relaxed state, occasioned by the unnatural demand made on the generative organs for so long a time; hence the instantaneous emission of semen on mere contact of a female. The state of mind also induced by this habit, and which had its origin in the exhausted state of the body, had re-acted on the exhausted body and completed whatever was wanting to incapacitate the individual still farther for the due performance of the act. In less than one month, however, the individual was rendered perfectly capable of discharging the duties of a husband—his mind recovering its strength and tone, as soon as the vigour of the body was re-established.

The case signed A. B. is another striking instance of the dreadful effects of self-abuse, both on mind and body. This person had been indulging in the habit for ten years, almost once a day; and by attending rigidly to my advice and directions, he was, in less than three months, restored to manly vigour. The state of depression of mind in this case is truly characteristic of the results of onanism.!

In the case of M. N., we have a melancholy example of the ruinous effects of sexual intercourse carried to excess, and before the generative system. was developed or matured. Hero we have nearly the same train of symptoms as those induced by self-abuse, vis.,.great debility and total incapacity of both mind and body. HeT4, too, we have another effect generally, but not always occurring, viz., baldness; by a course of medicines, however, suited to the.ioase, the unfavourable symptoms gradually subsided, and thei natural desire of sexual intercourse, which had boen completely .destroyed by excessive indulgence, gradually and perfectly restored,' .

OHU . ili."l. '. 'li i:yi\ . '—r—

writ .' :'t. yT.t'xi mi- 1 ii.n-i

.inr.. in."/ -iot ,».,/ CASE XVI.

blL- . 'r.A .ca'J-iijX'i i.i:i 1 J. J./I.u

I „SlR I '.«ii J !imoc i,.l„nii!r.iin„::."I'iverpooI, Jan. 13,1811.

* Having' ftfltito fUe'- otfyerteemeht of your excellent book; entitled 'fliuh'oorl.tW the: 'Liverpool Mercury, I was induced to purchase it, having for sointrlSinle been led to believe that I am" onWof^'uiUmMatfc victims-of'the disease of which it treated I shall'sttit^ my oWse toyou. lam now nineteen yearsold» ''Aftb the ape of from twelve to thirteen, I formed the destructive htfokio of self-abuse; and up to the age of eighteen have indulged ittilii four or five times a week. I have now, however, given up the!' destructive habit for the last twelvemonth. AVhen at the age 6P fourteen and upwards, I was considered to be very clever: omi!considered by my parents as likely to do well in the world. But alas! this baneful habit soon blighted all their fine hopes. My passions were very strong for the female sex; but in order to' avoid indulging in that way, I adhered to what I thought the less injurious habit of selt-pollution—and what have been tb» dismal consequences? Just what you describe in your book. From having been active and stoutly made, I am now emaciated, and unv. illing to make the slightest exertion, bodily or mental. I feel a disgust for society) for dress and amusement of every kind. My memory is much impaired. My spirits are desponding; I was once or twice near committing suicide. My friends^ who once took so much pride in my high spirits and vivacity, ure quite astonished at me. I lately attempted to have intercourse with a female, but was obliged to give up from sheer debility. I.'have now a sort of disgust for women in general; no seminal' discharges at night, except in cases of lascivious dreams; my sight not impaired till very recently, when a slight tinge of yellow, with a bluish streak, appeared around my eyes, and my forehead wrinkled. Enclosed, I send Jtl. You will be good enough to write to me with plain directions for diet, regimen, exercise, medicine, &c. Would I had written to you before; I trust, however, it is not yet late. Being well connected, and known in Liverpool, I require the utmost secrecy. "I am, Sir,





"Your obedient Servant, ''

"1. TV

"J. L. Curtis, Esq."

——. ,'

CASE XVII.

"Manchester, March 14,1844.

"Siit' t 1

"The perusal of your excellent publication, which has just

fallen into my hands, has determined me to consult you on my case.

When about ten years of age, / was initiated into the destructive

habit of self-pollution, which I have eagerly pursued until within a

very recent period. I am now nearly twenty-one. I have

been in the habit of indulging in this horrid practice two or

three times a-week. My constitution was naturally strougihfld

vigorous. A few months ago, I, for the first time, began to espefr

rienee the bad effects of my gross sensuality, and became 'i6

much alarmed, that I determined to consult the family surgeon?"

and, after considerable struggTe, at 'leagth -disclosed -to liinv myi'i

entirecase., Heprescribedforme » course of tonics:(aprepani«

tionof iron! I think, at first), which did mu some, but not much:

good. I' complained t* him of anilte pain^iari4'fullne«Si.aim«Ue: first contracted this habit at school from an associate; and have continued it for the space of nine years, until about a fortnight since, when I first saw your truly'valuable book. I shall now state to you my condition as shortly as I can. I am twentythree years of age; have occasional intercourse with females; hut of late I find myself rather unable for the act of coition, though still not without some desire. I have involuntary emissions of seed at night—generally once or twice a week. My Strength is gradually diminishing; my mind and spirits are sadly depressed; I have no desire of life; my memory is failing me, as also my sight—at night time I can scarcely see at all. I have severe pains in my loins, and in the small of my back, and also at the root of my penis, and generally some dull pain in the genitals; I also spit up a dark coloured phlegm. On reading your good book, something whispered me I should get well if I followed the directions in it. I therefore now throw myself wholly on your skill. Let me hear what is the amount of fee I am to send you; and, for God's sake do not delay, as my strength is failing me every day. On hearing from you I shall send you the money. My occupation is behind a counter, with occasional going out. Do not fail to let me hear from you. "I remain, Sir,





-woiti "Yours, &c. '. nr.ify'rAti: "ToJ.L.CunU.E*,." cc

Remark.—The writers of the two preceding letters have, within the last few days, written to me, to inform me of the perfect re-establishment of their health.

ICTTJJ

J .... ,... . ... '. . '' ,.-!':.i



CASE XIX

"June 11th, 1840.(. l"*J*. . . wifntoJ tqmolte

"If I were addressing a gentleman of a different profession to your own on tie subject I am about to enter upon, I should feel it necessary, both for him and myself, that I should state shortly the

?o»uses that produced the effects which it is now my painful duty to describe, but, to a practitioner i if your experienoe, it cannot be necessary to say more than that I was perfectly ignorant^ when I commented the fearful habit of self-abuse (about six years ago), of the crime Iwas committing, against myself and against my God.

. Doubtless, instances (f a similar nature so often coral) before yeu, chat I need make no further introduction to my confessions. As

.I before stated, I commenced the practice about six years ago. I was then a boy about fifteen or sixteen years of age, and a swimming bath was the place where (by a friend a little older than myself, who accompanied me) I was first tiiliglit the fearful lesson. I continued the habit for twelve or eighteen months, at intervals varying from twelve hours to as many days, and then commenced the retribution which has ever since followed me, of involuntary Nocturnal emissions, which annoy me, on the average, I should .think abuu^Qnce^a week .-„. bey and this, I have





never felt any effect of body or of mind, ^eyond, :ja.my1b#.dyr.a Susceptibility, real as well as apparent, po tfij^e .^old^ W winter Weather, and, in my mind, nothing but that sorrow arid disgust which may naturally be supposed would haunt the mind of a youth', who was not quite lost to every sense of shame or decencyi, rhave now entirely left off the practice, for, I should think, about five years.

'In person, lam short and thin, fair complexion, and of rather delicate organisation (though this I hardly like to attribute to my baneful practice, inasmuch as I always was so before Icommeuce« it). My occupation is a sedentary one, as are also my habits, being very fond of reading, &c. I am a single man, and have never had connection with a female. Have no attack on my vocal powers, like that mentioned in one of the cases quoted in your excellent work on Manhood, nor my vision, nor my hearing ; and, with fcespect to its mental attacks, have none (as I before stated), so far as 1 can discover, my memory being tolerable, perhaps I might Say better than that of most persons; arid (if such a statement may be made without vanity, and I am sure that it can for the jpurpose I am now making it) I believe I am generally looked Upon by most of my acquaintances, &c, as rather clever than otherwise. I forgot to say, that on one or two occasions, if I have been sitting before the fire, and afterwards, have been romping or kissing a girl, I have had an involuntary emission ; this, however, but once or twice. Delicate as may have been the topics on which I have before touched, I cannot help feeling that I am now approaching one that 'is still more so. I find Money was to many of your correspondents but little object, to me, alas, it is.* great object. Now, sir, if you can cure me, I feel that no money would be too much to pay you; but yet, even with this feeling, I am compelled to ask you to be as lenient with me in this respect as you can; and even now, not my will but my poverty consents. Trusting, sir, that you will consider this, not as an attempt to lower your legitimate charges, but as an earnest appeal to your benevolence and your mercy, "which droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven upon the place beneath," and that you will favxw me with an answer that will deliver me out of this wretched dilemma. This is the statement of my ease; and what I require to.remove the effects described (if a curt can be effected, as I hope and trust it may, and of which T Should like to have yoar opinion, and as to its Probable distance,) is what I now wish to have from you. For this purpose I enclose a Post-office writer for £1, which is made payable at Piccadilly, die nearest -Money OrderOffioe to your residence. i Please address your communication (which, of course, I should like to receive as soon as

ipbs»ihte)itCfci 'ti1'''i rir,i.i- .'' . .m::,i T,J. .i.. "' il -i-.jTi Jj... i

lylifo ohiif u hnvnt ii vii) Mimii n 'iMi.iq ii\ <y." iliii.i ^!unni:wi i MVis^M'lfrSflttStftfWw I i.imi'-i.r'i.1jiii. r» "u„ .i1 ->ii. midl Ja .'dlnom iii'.iilyii) in -i'l'iwi lot Jiuml Mii' li-ii'ni]i!"'i I jiott.A ri'il! litin ,e fuli ./i\nm ?fi <i' eiuoil 'nl-ivt n..n't ;o': ne i "["viami i': . Mil liMwiiili.il M niia Tin sisil ihidit noilm1 'i:'..' nil b-i'immm :.i ui- Iiu ,-iiu !"iina d-Aii/i ,>.miWo.vi Ai./.ww Ji/. iyuihuiVwui .iiin! 1 ,iiiilJ !^liUrtl b^7«"J"01Htfln)i;"ii'rsT,i&['rslRanding5.! ."ty"'TM





NOTICE TO INVALIDS.



The Author ot this publication, having for many years past devoted his exclusive attention to the treatment of Diseases of llfef-UHtt&iy and Sexual Organs, Nervous and Dyspeptic Cases, 'marked by Mental Delusions, Despondency, Morbid Sensatipiu^, %0&& and Constitutional Debility, &c, begs to acquaint those *0 suffering, that he may be personally consulted at

TO ,.' .;. i . ..»ia

15, ALBEMAKLE ST., PICCADILLY, LONDON,;'

iPrJNCTUALLY FROM 10 IN TUB MORNING UNTIL 3; AND FROM 6 UNTIL 8 IN THE EVENING.

(ON SUNDAYS FROM ELEVEN TILL ONE.)



COUNTRY PATIENTS





Are informed, that by forwarding their communications. per post or otherwise, they can have the remedies applicable to their several di? orders forwarded 1" by iintials,'' in a portable compass, to any part of the United Kingdom, and they may be taken without confinement or hindrance from bn3ftfB8B, i imeuw are requested to be as minute as possible in the detail of their cases,—as to the duration of the complaint, ihe symptoms, age, genual habits of living, and occupation in life of the party. The communication must be accompanied by the usual consultation fee of one pound, without whi.h no notice whatever can be taken of their application; and in alt cases the most inviolable secrecy may he relied on.

PATIENTS residing in the EAST or WEST INDIES, NORTH AMERICA, and any of the BRITISH COLONIES, had better enclose a bank note for £10, or bili on a London house, in order to have a packet of medicines sent out by the next mail, which would be sufficient to meet the exigencies of all cases, unless there are any peculiarities requiring different treatment. By.so doing, a vast delay is saved, whereas by merely writing lor advice, a period of four or six months is lost in correspondence, before remedies can be administered, which frequently renders all atti mpts to restoration perfectly aburtive. The author has made arrangements, whereby packages can be ionvai ded w ith secrecy and despatch, to all parts of the world.

N. B.—Mr. Curtis begs leave to impress on Country Patients the expediency, nay. in many cases, the absolute necessity of at least afl'ordiug hini, where it is at all practicable, One personal interview; the advantages which would resuit to the patient from such an an aiwaient, by enabling fhejto $o form a clearer and more precise judgment ot the nature and bearings of each case, would more than repay the patient for the trouble of one journey toLondon by the increased certainty and celerity of the cure; but if this be inconvenient let the patient pass urine in a tumbler at bed-time, and after standing thiriy-six hours, report in his letter on its appearances, deposit, &c &c; . . . i-i.(?'





Or Bankers Letters of Credit, &c, may be made payable in the name of John Lewis Curtis, or in any other name the Patient prefers; but in the latter case, the name to be signed must be mentioned in the ]eitereuiitaioiii£ the Order, otherwise payment at the Post-office will bq refused :.and a' letter containing any amount of Money is sure to be safely delivered, if regi*fercii fe* Sixpence, tbeie being no necessity to state the contents to the Post-master.





REVIEWS Or THE WORK.

JaBq ?"n1 . /.' i '" ,. ,

.R'iI»Ij Work, a FORTY-NINTH Edition otwhlchw no*. preheated Jo#p public, 40,000 copies having been exhausted since its first appeii/'(lnce*h&s been inni'h Improved and enlarged by the addition of a 'more extended and clear detail of general principles, as also by tbe insertion of sever/U new and hit/hip interesting cases. The book, as has been already stated, Is the result Of very ample and daily increasing experience in a class of diseases, which, for some unaccountable reason, have been either altogether overlooked, or treated with indifference, by the ordinary medical practitioner; and the authors have therefore, for many years, devoted themselves'excltisiveiy to the treatment of a certain class of diseases; of the necessity of so doing, they weie further convinced by feeling that tact, In investigating (he latent sources of many diseases, which arise from secret practices, can only be acquired by an exclusive and undivided attention to this department of medical practice. The numberless instances daily ©warring, wherein affections of the lungs, putting on all the outer appearances of consumption, which. however, when traced to their source, are found to result from certain baneful habits, fully proves that the principle of the division of labour is nowhere more applicable than in medical practice.—We feel no hesitation in saying, that there is no member of society by whom the book will not be found useful, whether such person hold the relation of a Parent, a Preceptor, or a Clergyman.

The PARENT, who beholds his beloved child pining away, and fast approaching to a premature grave, In consequence of some disease, which, for want of careful investigation of its real cause, has been set down to the score of consumption, will, on perusing this Work, be astonished to find, that in nine-tenths of the cases of young persons of both sexes, who perish of what is called pulmonary consumption, heart disease, tabes, &c, the sole and exclusive origin has been the indulgence in certain destructive habits practised by youth much more frequently than it is at all suspected.

The PRECEPTOR, also, who holds (temporarily at least) the relation and responsibility of a parent, will. by perusing this work, be directed and rery much assisted in investigating and detecting the too often concealed practices so often introduced into schools, whereby the health and ultimately the lives of his pupils are sure to be compromised, unless the evil be arrested in proper time. He will here find a clue to guide him through the intricate mazes of this moral labyrinth, and a standard whereby tojudge, when delicacy of health should appear to attack any of his young charges, what the real causes of such attack may be, and thus he will be enabled to check the evil in its incipient state. i

The CLERGYMAN, in whose sacred character is at once concentrated the two-fold relation of parent and instinct or, will here be directed as to the nature of those habits to which youth is addicted; he will also be enabled to point out'the disastrous consequences which are sure to follow from them if not relinquished.— Extract from the Sun Evening Paper,





REVIEWS OF THE WOES -Continued.

Curtis On Manhood. (Strange).—A perusal of this work will easily distinguish its talented authors from the host of medical writers and medicine vendors whose pretensions to cure all diseases are daily so indecently thrust before the public. Its originality is apparent, and its perusal breathes consolation and hope to the mind of the patient.—Naval and Military Gazette,



Curtis ox Manhood should be in the hands of youth and old age. It is a medical publication, ably written, and developes the treatment of a class of painful maladies, which has too long been the prey of the illiterate and designing.— United Service Gazette. .



Curtis ox Manhood.—It develops the fearful shoals on which a large proportion of human happiness is wrecked, and furnishes a chart by which they may be avoided and escaped. Fortunate for a country would it be, did its youth put into practice the philanthropic and scientific maxims here laid down- one cause of matrimonial misery might then be banished from our land, and the race of the enervate be succeeded by a renewal of the hardy, vigorous spirits of the olden time.—Chronicle.



I consider the Treatise Ox Manhood is decidedly the best extant in the French or English language. The subject is extremely important, and one too much overlooked by our profession generally; and the evils of the vice on which the publication treats, are not appreciated by the community. Although the cases presented in the brok are frightful, yet, judging from many patients who have been under my treatment, they have not been overdrawn.— From A. Sidney Doanet M.D., New York.



Curtis ox Manhood.—This is really a valuable work, for, by pointing out the diseases resulting from excesses, the evils of which are manifest in every insane asylum, no less than in the shattered constitution of those indulging, will do much to prevent the vice which, by its prevalence among the young, has so much influence on the present, as on the future well-being of many.—Herald.



Messrs. Curtis's work, entitled MANHOOD, is one of the few books now coming before the public on such a subject which can lay claim to the character of being strictly professional, at the same time that it is fully intelligible to all who read it.—The moral and medical precepts given in it render it invaluable.—Magnet.



MANHOOD, A Medical Work.—The clear exposition of the source of many of those diseases which prove so fatai to youth, and which are set down by the every-day observer as the result of common causes, such as exposure to cold, sudden vicissitudes of temperature, hereditary taint, &c, Is truly convincing and extremely satisfactory.—We say "satisfactory," inasmuch as Mr. Curtis have shown that many diseases, such as Pulmonary Consumption, Epilepsy, fyc, hitherto the opprobria of medicine, may, when taken in proper time and submitted to judicious treatment, be brought to as favourable a termination as any other class of affections.—Chronicle.



Mr. CURTIS may be consulted daily at his residence, 15, ALBEMARLE STREET, PICCADILLY, LONDON.

Country Patients are requested to be as minute ns possible in the detail of their cases. The communication must be accompanied by the usual consul* tation fee of £lt and in all cases, the most inviolable secresy may be relied on.

N.B.—Hours of Attendance from 10 to 3, and 6 to 8 in the Evening. On Sundays, from 11 to 1.





s





About this Book - From Google

This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project to make the world's books discoverable online. It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume may appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the publisher to a library and finally to you.

Google Book Search has digitized millions of physical books and made them available online at the Google Books web site. The digitization at the most basic level is based on page images of the physical books. To make this book available as an ePub formated file we have taken those page images and extracted the text using Optical Character Recognition (or OCR for short) technology. The extraction of text from page images is a difficult engineering task. Smudges on the physical books' pages, fancy fonts, old fonts, torn pages, etc. can all lead to errors in the extracted text. Imperfect OCR is only the first challenge in the ultimate goal of moving from collections of page images to extracted-text based books. Our computer algorithms also have to automatically determine the structure of the book (what are the headers and footers, where images are placed, whether text is verse or prose, and so forth). Getting this right allows us to render the book in a way that follows the format of the original book.

Despite our best efforts you may see spelling mistakes, garbage characters, extraneous images, or missing pages in this book. Based on our estimates, these errors should not prevent you from enjoying the content of the book. The technical challenges of automatically constructing a perfect book are daunting, but we continue to make enhancements to our OCR and book structure extraction technologies.

We hope you'll enjoy these books as much as we do.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.

We also ask that you:

Make non-commercial use of the files: We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for personal, non-commercial purposes.

Refrain from automated querying: Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

Maintain attribution: The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

Keep it legal: Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe.



About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences.
