This book made available by the Internet Archive.





PREFACE.

The following chapters have been written for tlie purpose of imparting some little information on subjects of the greatest importance. The friglitful ravages of Spermatorrhoea, and the dire effects of Syphilis, are matters which must almost alarm the calm impartial observer. If anything can therefore be done to stay the mighty torrent, he who, having the means at his command, should neglect to do it would be criminal. The cause of humanity—of religion —demands assistance from all who are in a position to give it. Feeling thisj I have done what I could.

The following pages are pre-eminently practical: I am no theorist. To offer theory when assistance is required is very like giving a stone-in answer to a rccpiest for bread. Speculation we have enough of—hypothesis we are nearly-surfeited with—what we want is something tha t can be put into practice. I have related my own medical experience, and narrated cases that have come under my own observation.



PKEFACi;.

This may seem egotistical, Lut it is the only true metliod of procedure. Why should I devote my book to what occurred to others ? 1 know nothing of it, except by hearsay. What I have seen, that I speak of, because that I know. ISTor have I succumbed to that false prudery TY-hich is so prevalent in society: I have disregarded it because I believe it to be mischievous and to have no connection ^\'ith real, genuine modesty. I have told plain facts, and those who affect to be shocked at them will only remind me of the young lady whose modesty was so great that she could not look at the noticed truth. My aim is a good one : if men misinterpret my motive I cannot help it, nor do I care for what they may say.

But it is now quite unnecessary to make any apology for publishing a book of this nature. The importance of the subject on which it treats has long been recognized by the Pulpit and by the Press, by the learned and by the unlearned, by the Medical Profession, and by their patients. I do not hesitate to assert that the lessons taught by this little book will prove of the greatest value to all who study them in a proper spirit. The laws of the Creator are absolute and nnchunging ; it is inipossi])le to



TREFACE.

do evil or to violate those laws without ill effects resulting. Health is essential to happiness; and to enjoy health ^\Q must study the unchanging laws which govern it, and they are not difficult to understand. Years of experience have proved that many of the most fatal diseases to which man is suhject arise from unre-stramed passions and vicious indulgences. ' 'Tho solitary vice of Self-pollution," says Dr. Woodward, ''spreads desolation through the land." When we see the miserable victims of an insidious and unsuspected disease slowly but steadily emaciating; when we view a series of phenomena faintly and indistinctly characteristic of a great variety of disorders, such aa consumption, wasting away, loss of energy, physical and mental, and actual brain disease' can we surrender without remorse—secundum artem, as it were—the unhappy sufferer to his fate ? Shall we not rather, despite false delicacy, investigate the origin and causes of such diseases, and endeavor to determine the true pnnciples of their cure ? To these investigations the MICROSCOPE has proved an invaluable assistance, and the most important recent discoveries are due to its aid. The discovery of the Spermatozoa and their existence in the



PREFAcr:.

spermatic fluid of all animals, proved that their presence was essential to reproduction. Hence a microscopic examination of urethral discharges, or of the urine, furnishes means for a correct diagnosis of some of the most obscure cases of spermatorrhea and impotence. The author takes this opportunity of tendering his thanks to his numerous friends, patients, and to the public generally, for the favor with which his previous works on the subject have been received. I have endeavored in this treatise to give the result of my mature experience in language simple and free from technicalities. If I am successful in warning one who would have fallen of the fearful consequences of vice ; of restoring one to hope who had otherwise been hopeless, this work has not been wntten in vain. In conclusion, I may observe that those who wish to apply for advice or assistance may confulentlv do so without hesitation or difli-donce: aslhemost timid may rely on my m-variablv regarding Ih.t inviolable secrecy winch has alr^adf proved the basis of an extensive and respectable professional reputation

L. J. Kahx, M.D.

61 EAfT Tehtii Btrkkt, Nf.w York,



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

LECTURE I.

THE ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF THE URINARY AND GENERATIVE ORGANS.

In these days of general education, eveiy man ought to possess a certain knowledge of the composition of his frame, the science known as Anatomy ; * and also the mode that nature adopts to carry out the necessities of life, that is Physiology. The present work being devoted to the consideration of special maladies, their causes, prevention, and treatment, it will ho sutTicient for our object to give a brief and popular description of the generative organs, in order that the nature of the diseases may be fully understood. We are indeed "fearfully

* "Anatomy is llio science of orgauizatiou. Physiology is the science of life."— Kichkrand.



NEKV0U8 EJCHAUSTtOK.

and wonderfully made the great importanco of the generative organs, and their preservation in a state of health and vigor, are essential to well-being, both physical and mental. Their admirable construction, form, and use are a striking evidence of skill and contrivance directed to the performance of that most important function,the reproduction of the species. The generative organs in man may be divided into external and internal; the former consisting of the testicles and penis, and the latter of the seminal vessels, the urethra, the prostate gland, &c., with their arteries, veins, nerves, and lym])hatics. , The urinary organs consist of the kidneys, ureters, bladder, and urethra. The kidneys (rcnes) are two glands, in shape representing a kidney bean, lying close upon the muscles of the loins, behind and below the stomach. It is supposed these organs arc larger in persons of strong sexual passions than in those who are less addicted to venerv.

llie Ureters are long tubes, connecting the kidneys with the bladder, to which they coiivey the urine sccreied by the kidneys.

TJie Bladder is situated in the lowest ])art of the body, or pelvi^; it is a muscular bag or ])ouch, and consists of at least three coats or



NEEVOUS EXHAUSTION.

11

coTerings. One being composed of muscular fibres, its contraction causes the expulsion of the urine. At the neck of the bhidder is a muscle called the sphincter, by which tlie involuntary flowing away of the urine is prevented. The chemical composition of urine, in health, according to recent analysis, is as follows :— {Vide Licbig.) ., . ...

I.:. .

Urea Uric acid Coloring matter Odorous principles Kreatine Lactic acid Hippuric acid

Separated from the blood by the kidneys.

Sulphates Phosphates Chloride of sodium Soluble salts

Debris of epithelium Phosphate of lime Mucus of the bladder

Developed more directly from the food.

II.

Saline combinations derived from the food.

Common to all fluids passing over mucous surfaces.



NERVOUS EXriArSTIOIy'.

We direct attention more particularly to this table, as many diseases, in fact nearly all, change in some respect the composition of the urine; and careful analysis enables the medical man to arrive at a correct diagnosis at an earlv stage of the malady, •when any mischief may be easily remedied. In unhealthy urine some one or other of these substances may be in excess, or may be altogether wanting. The elements mav be combined in a manner altogether different; or some substance may be eliminated from the blood and prove a source of considerable danger to life itself. We have not sufficient space to enlarge on this subject; ^ye "will merely refer to one or two of the most serious of these diseases. In Diabetes, not only is there an inmoderate flow of urine, but it is found to contain a large amount of sugar—so much indeed as to be perceptibly sweet to the taste. I'n-less attended to at an early stage, this disease is generally fatal. We have saved many valuable lives by attending to the indications shown by the urine at a stage when the disease was not suspected. Others we have warned, and not in vain, though at the time it was dilficult to convince them. One more illustration of the value of Ihese inquiries. 'J'here is a ilecidedly



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

13

marked change in the chemical composition of the urine when a stone is forming in the bladder. For some time previously, a state of health is indicated which the judicious administration in remedies may remove, and thus prevent the necessity of a serious and painful operation. We may here remark, that an accurate analysis of the urine is one of the most difficult processes in chemistry, and can only be performed, with any approach to correctness, l)y one who is well versed and constantly engaged in minute investigations of this kind. It requires, also, one who has acquired a thorough knowledge of the microscope, the value of which cannot be overrated. For many years the author has availed himself of this valuable adjunct to diagnosis, with a success which his attentive practice will testify.

The testicles (testes) are two glands enclosed in the scrotum, or purse; they are composed of a vast number of fine tubes, folded in various directions, and enclosed by a membrane called the tunica albuginea. The testicles secrete the semen, and are supplied with blood from the vessels which arise from the main arterial trunk, called the spermatic arteries. The importance which men attach to the due performance of



u

KERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

the function of these organs is evident from the number of the suicides caused by their imperfection. The testicles are sometimes three in number, and occasionally there is only one, though many of the latter cases prove, on examination, to be a retention of the testicle in the abdominal canal. A young man -who had been ordered a truss for a supposed rupture, consulted ns; Ave found the case was simply one of retention of the testicle. Had the truss been applied, he might have been lamed for life.

The Seminnl Ca?ials {Yasa, Deferentia),which ascend on each side from the upper part of the testicle, accompany the spermatic artery, vein, and nerves, and are together called the Sjjermatic Cord. The seminal bladders (vesiculT) are at the upper part of the bladder, and are considei-ed to be the reservoirs for the semen. They also secrete a peculiar fluid, which is added lo the semen in the act of coition. The prostnte gland is in front of tlje seminal bladder; in sluipc ;ind size it somewhat resembles a chestnut. Tin-fluid wliich it secretes is of a cream color, and serves to lubricate the surface of the urctlira, along which the semen has to })ass. The prostate gland is subject to disease and relaxation, and when this is the case the act of copulation is



^'ERVOUS ExHAUStlON.

15

nnBatisfactory and even painful. We have frequently been consulted in cases where there has been a continuous discharge from this gland; the semen is then emitted by the slightest effort, more especially during sleep; this has often been the cause of wasting away, strophy, or consumption. Many surgeons have treated these cases as venerial, and their inexperience has proved most injurious. The microscope here lends its valuable aid. The penis is divided into the root, the body and the glands. The spongy substance which forms the glans penis is covered with a thin membrane, tinder which are placed very sensitive nervous papilla%which are the chief cause of the pleasure in coition. Many in the venerial act have not the glands distended, which arises fi-om a weakened state of the cavernous body of the urethra. When this is the case from Onanism, or other causes, impotence will arise; Avhich, unless its cause be perfectly understood, cannot be cured by any physician.

The -glans is protected by the prepuce, or foreskin. In healthy men, at the moment before the semen is ejected, the glans and whole body of the penis arc extremely rigid; soon after a convulsive motion follows, the semen is dis-



NEKVOUS EXHAUSTION.

charged by a reflex action, and there is a slight loss of strength throughout the body, which however soon recovers tone. But the erection of the penis may also be produced by mechanical irritation, as friction of the glans of the prepuce, caused by a distended bladder, as evinced in the morning after a night's rest, also by tumors or stone in the bladder. This highly complicated and delicate organism, of which we have given a brief outline, is entirely subservient to the proper secretion and ejection of the Semeis".

The semen is a thick whitish fluid,with a peculiar odoriferous smell; it consists of the liquor seminis and certain solid particles. The liquor seminis is colorless, transparent, and albuminous, and contains, floating in it, two principal constituents, viz., spermatozoa and seminal granules. The microscope must here be called into requisition. Tlie spermatozoa are living bodies or animalcula, existing in very considerable numbers in liealtliy semen. They are also found in the urim^, but lu^ver excepting the g-euerativo oro:ans have become weakened by Onanism or excesses.

The animalcula are formed like a tadpole, witli a round head or body, and a narrow tail;



^'ERVOUS EXHAUSTIOif.

17

they move with great rapidity, and their length is abo^at a six-hiindreth to a thousandth part of an inch.

"Wagner has shown that they are developed within cells, and originate from the spermatic grannies, being formed by the dispersion of the nuclei of tliese cells. Their original discovery is due to Lowcnhoeck, in 1607. The animalcula are not found in the fluid contained in the seminal organs before puberty, but they are always present afterwards; nor do they disappear while the power of j^rocreation is retained. But when the semen is diseased by the debility of the parts, their number becomes fewer, until at last they almost disappear. There is no doubt that the animalcula are essential for the impregnation of tlie ovum in the female, but all our ingenuity and research have been vainly exerted in the attempt to unravel the mysterious process of conception. Life and organization are neither inseparal)lc nor even identical. Man is still ignorant how life begins or ceases. "We must turn to the Creator of all things, and though wo can explain tlie structure, the primal cause is beyond all human reason.



PHYSIOLOGY OF MARRIAGE.

The sacred ordinance of marriage emanates from the Deity, by whom we are enjoined to "increase and multiply,"—hence it is considered honorable amongst all men, and should not he entered upon carelessly or Avantonly, nor without duly considering the causes for which it was originally ordahied. Marriage was introduced l)y the Divine Creator, in the time of man's primitive innocence, as the means of his happiness and the perpetuation of his race. Its influence extends from individuals to kingdoms, and to the whole world. Jeremy Taylor calls it "the 'mother of the world, Avhich preserves cities, and fills cities, churches, and even heaven itself." It is the primitive source of morals and society, the nurse of virtue and patriotism, the stay and support of governments. In a word. no other social institution exercises so profound an influence on the well-being of society. The obligations of marriage are mutual and imperative; if any deception is practised, those culpable will sooner or later receive punishment in the disappointment of their pleasure, the loss of tlieir



19

health, and the remorse oJ; tlieir o^\■n reflections. It unfortunately liappcus—in (he present arti-lleial state of society—that many men are unable to marry before middle life, perhaps after a you tlx spent in more or less dissipa(;ion—perliaps after having acquired the seeds of disease and impotence. The question then arises—Is such a man capal)le of procreating healthy children, or of satisfying those desires inplanted by nature in the most modest and virtuous of women, not less strongly tlum in man himself? The consciousness of deliciency must cause any man to feel abashed, and he can offer no excuse but what must tend to lessen the love and respect of liis wife. Ignorance—of a density unequalled, of an obstinacy unparelleled—long prevailed on the topics Avhicli control most completely the fitness of men and women for wedlock. Tliere arc certain stages of injured health, capable, by early and skilful treatment, of thorough a,nd speedy cure; but which, if neglected,'or injudiciously dealt with, render aught but disgust and misery in marriage a thing humanly impossible.^ No man is so likely to be jealous as the one that is conscious that his wife has just reason for complaint; and no wonum is so likely to go astray as one who is tantalized by the abortive toying



20 NERVOUS EXIIAUSTJOX.

of an inipotent husbund. We admit nothing can justify a Avifc in proving false to the marriage vow, and nothing can ever after restore her to the position of a virtuous woman; but cases frequently occur where much might be urged in extenuation, and M'here he who is considered the injured husband is in reality more guilty than his wife. Women were formed to complete the well-being of man, and those who abstain from inter-coui-sc with them arc rarely either happy or healthy. Marriage constitutes the bond of society, and the respect paid to its ordinances affords the best test of the moral condition of i). civilized people; but where generative weakness exists, let not the unhappy sufferer augment his own misery by the sacrifice of one from whom he can expect nothing but dislike, re-]iroaches and contempt, and whose happiness may thus be marred. It may be safely affirmed, that a difference of temperament between married persons is conducive not only to mutual affec-ti(m but to fertility. Nature appears to desire marriages between differentfamiliesand nations, because such crossings of the various races improve and invigorate the species. Humboldt and others have observed that the offspring of Europeans and >:iliiopcans arc peculiarly robust



NERVOUS EXHAUSTIOSr,

21

and active. From numerous observations of a similar nature, he argues that the best mode of eradicating hereditary diseases, gout, scrofula, consumption, epilcps}', madness, etc., in their early tendency, is by tlie commixture of the species in intermarriage, Avhich often prevents the transmission of disease to the next generation. The mental weakness, as well as mean appearance, of some of the European royal families is strongly colirmatory of the truth of these principles. Walker, in his admirable and interesting work " On Intermarriage," proves beyond the possibility of cavil, that insanity, idiocy, and numerous physical ailments occur four times above the average in tlie offspring of "famihj marriages^' AVhen persisted in for some generations, the race usually becomes extinct. Nor is this confined to man alone—the rule extends from man downwards, through the whole realm of animated nature.

The essentials of reproduction on the male side are a healthy condition of the whole generative system: the erection of the penis should be perfect, maintcnant and vigorous, and the secretion and emission of the semen obedient to the command. On the part of the female, the generative organs should be sensible of the



NEHVOUS EXHAUSTION.

approaching impulse; the best test of their healthy state is the presence of desire, and the enjoyment of the orgasm simultaneously with the male. Instances of generative incapacitj", local weakness, and utter impotence are very numerous. Again, it is no uncommon circumstance for a man on his approach to a female, with a view to sexual commerce, though he may possess all the confidence necessary, to find the tone of his inclination suddenly leave him, and to observe a seminal discharge almost immediately on contact, or even before; the design is, of course, frustrated, at least for some time, and he has to endure the double mortification of incurring and giving disappointment. Another frequent deficiency is an insuficieutly lasting erection, which prevents the mechanical irritation requisite to excite the proper action of the seminal vessels. Other persons possess both desire and capability, but at very considerable intervals—a sure sign of approaching decay. Occasionly, from disease, or from ^vant of exercising the generative functions, men may be found where the organization is perfect (though the development is rather smaller than usual), yet where there is a total inaptitude, or, at all events, a complete distaste for sexual intercourse.



Sucn cases are curable without mucli diUiculty. lu the early stages of seniiual weakness, different persons are variously affected; some are incapable of procuring a discharge of the semen into the cavity of the female genitals in a natural way, though they may effect temporary erection; while others cannot perform-the act of copulation, from emission taking place too quickly, and before the proper firmness of the male organ has enabled it to effect the requisite penetration. What man, possessing the ordinary feelings of a man, can contemplate without a shudder these terrible consequences of self-indulgence? The nuptial bed of such an one, instead of teeming Avith a hallowed, ecstatic and transporting delight, is converted into a scene of blended mortification, disgust, disappointment, and suppressed anger; and it is now that the mistaken bride is made to feel herself the victim of previous sensuality—the poor, deceived, last hope of vigor—anxious for offspring, yet baffled from day to day in the arms of the man she has vowed at the altar to love and honor; and he, conscious of the cause of his infirmity, the dark secret smouldering in his breast, galling his Avretched existence, and not to be imparted even to the wife of his bosom.



NERVOL'3 EXnAUSTION".

A gentleman recently wrote to us in the following powerful langtuige:—" Dear Sir,—You arc the first to whom I have plucked up resolution to open my case; I fear it is beyond even yotir skill, hut,, for heaven's sake, give it your careful consideration, and above all, let me have your candid opinion; I shall then know how to act. My age is 2d; I have practised self-pollution, when a hoy, some years, indeed to a very recent period. i married a beautiful young woman three months ago. I experienced an excitement most powerful, my passion was most vehement, and I attempted the sexual act. Immediately a spontaneous emission occttrred, the excitement left me, and my emotions and desires became palsied. My system became utterly incompetent to manly orVigorous health. That is tlie history of my fii-st attempt, and of every succeed ing trial If you can assist me I shall be grateful for life. My wife bears with me with angelic patience, but I cannot long endure my i.n-esent wretchedness.'" In a letter a few months later, this gentleman ^•i-ites:—"My Dear Sir.—Words fail to express iny gratitude for your skill and kindness. I am happy to inform you that my dear wife is now enceinte. This "l am aware will not surprise vou: but I cannot forbear writing to express



IsERVOUS EXIIAUSTIOIy.

25

my gratitude. My dear wife also desires to be most kindly remembered."

That the liappiness of married life may in a great measure be secured or defeated by attention to, or neglect of, Avliat lies in our power previous to its consummation, is as true as that there are duties obligatory alike upon man and wife after marriage. If a man has made a hasty or thoughtless selection, the fault is assuredly his own. Although it, cannot be doubted that warm and mutual affection is an essential condition to niarried felicity, it must be remembered that passion is a false and treacherous guide, when not founded on well-merited and well-defined respect. It is often inquired, what is the proper age to enter the marriage state ? and the question is one that is difdcult to answer. Much depends upon individual health and temperament; but as a general rule, we find the happiest unions, and also the most fruitful, when the man marries from the age of twenty-five to thirty-five, and the woman is from five to seven years younger. Dr. Samuel Johnson observes: '' Those wlio marry at an advanced age will probably escape the encroachment of their children; but, in diminution of this advantage, they are likely to leave them, ignorant and help-



NEliVOUS KXHAU8T10K.

less, to a guardiaivs mercy; or, if that should not happen, they must at least go out of the world before they see those they love best either wise or great. " It is quite certain that on young women marriage will frequently have a most beneficial effect. Hysteria, ISTervousness, Irregu-laritiy, sometimes even Consumption, are known to disappear after marriage. In reference also to the male sex, it is quite certain that, in-depently of many morbid affections and habits which marriage removes, it augments the energ}-of the system of the blood vessels; the distended arteries, pulsating with greater force, transmit warmth and animation throughout the body; the muscles become more vigorous, the step more elastic, the voice firmer, every physical attribute of humanity becomes boldly developed. Marriage, however, is not altogether made up of "sighs and wreathed smiles;" though" it has its devotions, it has also its obligations; and the divine command, "increase and multiply," can only be obeyed by those in the full possession of mental and bodily vigor. Even under the most favorable circumstances of youth and vigor, it is necessary to Avarn the newly-married couple of the danger of excessive indulgence, which injures the health of women, and by causing



NERVOUS EXHAUSTIOK.

27

many painful disouses, soon rendei-s intercourse utterly repugnant. It also prevents or impairs the oiSspring—for whatever enfeebles or diseases the sexual organs must of necessity have that effect. Temperance in the connubial embrace, as in all other things, is the medium which we should observe and recommend. The following case will illustnite some of the dangers to which we have referred:—A¥. S. called upon us for consultation early in June, 18G2. Ilis ago was about twenty-five, and his occupation salesman in a dry-goods house. He had been always very regular in his habits, had never been guilty of Onanism, nor of illicit connection. His frame was rather delicate, and liis temperament nervous-sanguine. About ten months previously he had married a young widoAV, and for about six months he indulged very freely in the pleasure of the marriage-bed, without feeling any bad effects. About that time, however, he began to lose flesh very perceptibly, and to feel great lassitude on the least exertion. Ilis appetite failed—his sleep became disturbed and unre-freshing—his bowels constipated; in short,all the symptoms proved a general failure of health. Added to this, his sight became impaired, and also his memory—he lost energy and spirit, and



KERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

his daily occupation was a trouble to him. He now began to complain of pain in the upper part of the right lung, and considerable difficulty in breathing; and soon began to spit blood, of bright red color and frothy appearance. Becoming seriously alarmed, and suspecting that his illness was caused by excessive indulgence, he called upon us for advice. On examining hi.s chest, I observed some dullness on percussion in the upper portion of the right lung, immediately under the clavicle; the respiratory murmur was also absent from this part—in other respects the lungs seemed all right. The action of the heart was somewhat irregular, being very much hurried from a slight cause. Of course, it was essentially necessary that he should abstain from all sexual intercourse; medicine was prescribed suitable for the case, and within a month he began to recovei' strength—the pulmonary s\'mptoms gradually declined, and percussion elicited the natural healthy sound over the chest. He was under treatment some six or seven weeks, and he promises that tlie lesson shall not be thrown away.

We earnestly advice all wlio contemjjlate entering the marriage state to take advice from a thoroughly qnalihed pnictilioiior, as to whether



NERVOUS EXHAU8TI0K.

29

there is anything to be set right before the marriage is consummated. Much misery, perchance innocent lives may he spared by attending to this obvious and easy duty. Sometimes an old venerial contamination may be lingering in the blood. Careful examination and analysis will decide; and treatment for two or three weeks may prevent long years of unhappiness.

In concluding this part of my subject, I may be allowed to observe that it is right and useful that all men should know that there are principles of personal management which cannot be violated without the incurral of grievous penalties; it is right that they should know, when wisdom and regret succeed the heyday of inconsiderate self-indulgence, how these penalties may be mitigated, and how the sting of their remorse may be ultimately removed. The mo§t absurd of all emotions is that of despair. Let the sufferer remember that there is scarcely any degree of weakness or functional derangement to which the timely aid of science cannot apply a cure.



LECTUEE III.

ONANISM, OR SELF-POLLUTION.

Manustrapsio, Masturbation, the Sin of Onan, are the names commonly given to this pernicious habit, which may be defined a discharge of the semen by the stimulus of the virile organ with the hand ; the habit (it is said) of the solitary monk and recluse, as well as of inconsiderate youth, and too often of those whose riper years should prevent their guilty indulgence in an act so revolting to humanity, and so destructive to every sentiment and feeling of vigorous manhood"! Tf we refer to the opinions expressed by the most celebrated physicians amongst the ancients or modems, we find a remarkable uniformitv in their opinions on this subject. Cclsus remarks, "These habits are always hurtful, and indulgence in them weakens the strongest constitution." Galen gives a corresponding account of the evils caused by this vice. The late 'Sh: Benjamin Bell, the eminent surgeon, of Edinburgh, also, in reference to the effects of this indulcrence. says,—"A habit so baneful to many of our youth, that I believe it to be more destructive in its effects than a greater proj)ortion of all the



NERVOXJS EXHAUSTION.

31

diseases to which in early life they are liable." Besides rendering the patient himself miserable, it evidently entails the seyerest distress upon posterity by generating languor, debility and disease, instead of that strength of constitution, without which there can be no enjoyment. Lalleniand remarks,—"Our lunatic asylums alford many instances of insanity produced by this detestable practice." Nocturnal pollutions, or "wet dreams" are in most cases brought on by Onanism. After a short period has elapsed, the nocturnal are now conjoined with diurnal pollutions; the semen passes off in the urine, or at stool, without sensation, and therefore unmarked by the patient. It therefore becomes a problem of the greatest interest and importance, if there be any means by which the presence of spermatozoa, or the living j^rinciplo of the seed, may be detected with certainty. We have introduced into our practice the use of the microscope,^ which for the purpose of diagnosis is absolutely indispensable. By the examination of a small quantity of the matter or discharge from the urethra, or by the microscopic observation of the urine we are enabled to decide wii,h certainty as to the presence or absence of the seminal fluid, and, consequeutly, ou the neces-



KERVOUS EXHAUSTIOX.

sary treatment required b}- ilio ease. A gentleman called upon us in September, 186(3, aged 27. He stated he had been induced to consult us, owing to having observed some yellow-colored stain upon his linen. He had been treated for nearly a month for gonorrhoea; but finding himself get worse instead of better, had called for our opinion. We carefully examined the discharge, and also the urine, by means of the microscope, and irnmediately detected a great loss of semen in the urine, and that the matter consisted almost entirely of the seminal fluid. On inquiry he admitted, though with great reluctance, that he had been in the habit of practising Onanism. A proper course of medicine was administered, and in four or five weeks he was entirely well.

It frequently occurs, as a result of self-pollution, more especially when practised in early youth, that the testicles do not attain their full size and powers of secretii\g semen. This state has been termed ''an arred of drvdopwnit,'' a phrase which simply means iluit tlie organs have ceased to grow at a period of life ]n-evious to puberty. We have seen the case of a gentleman, aged 28, whose penis and testicles were not larger than those of a boy ten years old.



NERVOUS EXHAUSTIOX.

33

Other cases of a similar charactpr have also presented themselves to our notice. Such instances are not beyond the influence of medicine, unless when they occur in the persons of idiots. Wasting or diminution in the size imd powers of the organs may occur at any age. The testicle may retain its proper shape though diminished in size; it feels soft to the touch, and loses its elasticity and firmness. In texture it is pale, and the blood-vessels seem diminished in number, the spermatic cord becomes affected by the disease, the nerves shrink, and the cremaster muscle disappears. The thin gelatin-oTis semen which is formed is entirely devoid of spermatic granules and spermatozoa. In other Avords, its fertilizing power is lost, and impuis-sance gradually results. AVhen disease is the cause of the atrophy, the testicles may alter in shape —become uneven and irregular—sometimes elongated as well as diminished in size and weight. There is one form of disease which frequently precedes the decay of the organs, and which is seldom ol^served by medical men—a low inflammation, quite painless, acts upon the testicle, and gradually increases the bulk, at the same time diminishing the firmness and consistency; in some instances the testicle almost feels



NERVOUS EXHAUSTIOX,

as if dividing. On inquiring into the origin of these cases, we frequently find that a swelled testicle (hernia humoralis) has existed, caused by gonorrhcBa. Hence the necessity of curing urethral discharges as rapidly as possible, and the care required in the use of astringent injections. Injuries of the head, more especially the back part of the head, have been known to produce decay of the testicle; and this fact may tend to support the theory of the phrenologist that the seat of amatory passions is in the cerebellum. Doubtless the brain exercises great influence on the desire for sexual intercourse, and it is equally certain that there is a reciprocal action of the generative organs upon the brain. Such is the similarity of structure of the brain and the testicle, and so great the sympathy between them, that an extensive experience during many years has proved that in some instances a species of derangement is caused by diseases of the generative organs. It is chiefly on tlio youth of both sexes that self-pollution commits most ravages. This is so much more to be deplored, as it thus strikes at the very root of society, and has a direct and immediate tendency to destroy it, by enervating and debilitating, almost from their very cradle, those whom nature's



NEBVOUS EXHAUSTION.

35

God intended as best adapted to preserve and adorn it. How many of the debilitated and emaciated objects daily present themselves to our view, with pallid and haggard countenances and sunken eyes, who are indebted solely to the abominable act of masturbation for this wretched state of debility and exhaustion ? Disabled from rendering service either to themselves or friends, they drag on a life totally useless to others and a burden to themselves, in the midst of society in which they are despised. A frequent cause of the practice of Onanism is ignorance of the enormity of the crime, a crime, of which an eminent divine has written:—"In itself it is monstrous and unnatural—in its practice filthy and odious to extremity—its guilt is crying and its consequences ruinous — it destroys all conjugal affection—prevents natural inclination— and tends to extinguish the hopes of posterity."

There are thousands among the youth of both sexes—ingenuous, docile, diligent, and tractable —who, either from example or from accident, have thus learned this vice, Avho would have abhorred the thought, had they understood the nature of the sin, and been made acquainted with its fearful results. As connected with this subject, we may here observe that anything like



;g§ NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

attempted concealment respecting it is a practical injury to morality. The Book of books itself is not only standing evidence of the heinous-ness of "the sin of Er and Onan,''hnt of tlie necessity of proclaiming it to all mankind. Their sin was committed in the full con.sciousness of its inherent hatefulness, and therefore their punishment was most signal. Their example has been left on record as a feakful wakxing to FUTURE C4ENERATI0NS; as a measure of the depravity of certain transgressions, and the inevitable certainty of retributive justice. Anotlier cause of self-pollution is the secrecy with which it maybe committed; all other actions of nn-cleaniiness must have a witness, this needs none. Again, the laws against adultery, though in many cases inoperative, are sufficient to deter many; whereas in self-pollution neitlier the cautious nor tlie covetous imagine they have anything to fear. How strange it is that a man should show bashfulness and the utmost cowardice to liis fellow-creature (even shouhl that fellow-creature be the most impotent wretch) and that he should behave with gigantic boldness and impudence to the Almighty Creator of heaven and earlli. The most experienced medical practitioners are of opmion that the development of



STEEVOUS EXHAUSTION. 37

the nervous system, and the predominance of its action over the otlier parts of the organism, are • also amongst the causes of masturbation. We comparatively seldom see this habit indulged in by robust and vigorous persons, whose muscular and digestive organs are in full development; they are generally more disposed to exercise their limbs, as well as their appetite for the pleasure of the table, in which their minds are too much engaged to allow them to addict themselves to indulgences in other gratifications. This excessive development of nervous sensibility, which IS the source of so many praiseworthy actions, as well as of so many vicious enormities, and which, according to the directions it receives, gives rise to the most splendid or to the basest of results, may be derived either from natural disposition or from early education. It is immediately after early infancy, at that epoch when the faculties of the new being commence to be developed with energy, that he runs the greatest danger. If then an unfortunate accident, or, as too frequently happens, the indelicate touches of strange hands, disclose to the young subject what may at this time be considered a new sense, there takes place at this period towards the genital organs a greater or less con-



NERVOUS EXHAUSTIOX.

ceutration of tlic vital forces, aiicl the patient, led on by the delusive pleatiure, gives himself up with fury to a vice Avhich is sure soon to destroy him, or draw down on him evils more terrible than death itself. Another most dangerous period of life is the approach of puberty, which varies in this climate from the age of eighteen to twenty-two. The rapid growth of the generative organs—the increased power and frequency of erection—the rapid secietion of semen —all lead to the performance of that act Avhich is sure to occasion the deepest remorse. It is the attentive consideration of these varied facts which explains to us how, the habitual exercise of the genital organs, either by coition or masturbation, may so far get the better of the will of the individual as to force him to indulge in practices, the object of which is to gratify the venerial stimulus. In almost all such cases the shameful act when finished, is invariably followed by bitter regret; but as the organs obtain repose, the resolution which he had adopted, of relinquisli-mg the baneful practice, and which he had thought nothing could shake, are soon forgotten. We have frequently heard patients exclaim: "Oh! how often and often have I solemnly sworn never again to pollute myself, and how



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION".

39

often have I promised myself, when in the act, that it should be for the last time." We implore those who have addicted themselves to this ruinous and suicidal habit not to rely on their own resolution—not to depend on their oAvn firmness and fancied strength of mind; let them appeal to Higlier Aid—and, above all, let them prayerfully avoid temptation.

If we compare the injurious effect of excessive indulgence in coition and tliose of masturbation, we shall find that the causes wliich combine to render excess in the former dangerous act with much more energy in the second, aud that several circumstances peculiar to the latter render the results of its frequent repetition more serious. It isAvcll knoAvn that the man who addicts himself to the solitary and debasing practice of Onanism is kept for a considerable time in a state of general and permanent rigidity of the entire l)ody; this state of tension is sometimes carried so far tliat veiy painful cramps are caused by it, and tlie fatigue Avliich results obliges the patient to relax his efforts occassionaly to take -rest. It is sufficient to observe the circumstances which accompany masturljation to see that the nervous system must l)e directly affected by it, not only from the violent and continued oon-



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION".

tractions wliicli it occasions throughout the entire muscular system, but also by the prodigious tension of the imagination, wliich is in cases wound up to its highest state, in order to represent to the devoted votaries of self-pollution the fantastical object of their disgusting transports. Another cause which renders Onanism more dangerous than excessive indulgence in coition arises from the circumstance that it is much easier to addict one's self to the one than to abuse the other; for when a man gives himself up to the natural pleasures of love, the fatigue felt, as Avell by his companion as by himself, will have the effect of preventing his exhaustion; whilst on the other hand there is no bridle, no restraint on him who practises self-abuse; the former is in general obliged to wait for a favorable moment and opportunity to indulge in his excess—every momeni answers the purpose of the latter—all he requires is mere solitude. He constantly carries about him the sting which torments him; he alternately finds his imagination exciting his organs, and his organs inilam-ing his imagination. In short, there is nothing to distract or take up the attention of one who has addicted himself to Onanism, whilst a thousand circumstances are constantly distract-



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION".

41

ing the attention of the man who is disposed for the enjoyment of a female. Another serious danger in this vice is the period of life when persons addict tliemselves to it; we have occasionally met with it in quite young children, most frequen'fly amongst full-grown boys and young men, for the va,rious difficulties and impediments which prevent copulation before a certain age do not exist in the case of Onanism—thus the generative propensity, called forth prematurely, and gratified viciously, steps in amidst all the natural efforts of growth, with its unnaturul train of moral excitations, sensual shocks, and physical pollutions. No wonder that the Father of Medicine should notice its effects, thus iEtius gives the following description: " Young people have the air and appearance of old age; they become pale, effeminate, lazy, benumbed, stupid and imbecile; they have a total distaste for everything, are totally incapacitated, and may even become paralytic." In short,when we look upon the horrible consequences resulting from this practice, are we not justified in regarding it as a lingering moral and physical suicide ?

As we have intimated, the practice of Onanism, when once indulged in, is difficult to abandon; the patient is perhaps for years unconscious of any



NERVOUS EXHAUSTIOX.

change, and no one part of the body feels weakened more than another; but there gradually comes over a creej)ing languor, a want of energy, a sensation of lassitude, a depression of spirits, ennui, and a disinclination for society; these feelings at length increase so as to at%-act the attention of the patient and his friends. He and they are sensible that he is not what he formerly Avas; his face becomes pallid, the circles around the eyes depressed and darkened, a thinness is visible in his looks, his hands are frequently cold and clammy, he cannot bear the cold he was Avont to do, his old pursuits have no attractions for him, nor do any new ones attract his attention; his memory becomes imperfect, his vision is not so clear, nor his sight so strong, as formerly; morbid sensations annoy him; at length he sinks into fatuity, and either is carried off by some rapid decline, or hastens liis end by laying violent hands on himself. (Such is the history of many cases of suicide of which we read in the newspapers. The following, illustrating many of the above features, is from the work of the celebrated French physician, Tissot:—

" , by profession a Avatchmaker, had

been brought up morally, and, until the age of



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

43

sixteen had enjoyed a state of perfect health; about this period the evil example of a youthful companion initiated liim in the liabit of self-abuse, which he repeated daily, even to the extent of two or three times, and until the seminal emission was followed l)y a sliglit insensibility, and a complete prostration of mental and bodily strength; this warning was insufficient to rescue him from his disgusting practices; and the repetition of them became more frequent, till he was in a state which gave reason to apprehend a fatal termination. Too late a penitent, he had become incurable, and the generative oi-gans were so weakened that the slightest irritation caused a partial erection, with an immediate emission of seed, which of course i ncreased his Aveakness, and, becoming incapacitated, he was obliged to relinquish his business. Thus, overwhelmed with misery and disgrace, he pined for some months without assistance, with the agonizing reflection that he himself was the cause of his awful situation. I Avas called upon to attend him, and found him past recovery; he Avas meagre, pale, and almost incapable of moving; a palish Avatery matter issued from his nose, and a continued frothing from the mouth; he Avas alfccted Avith diarrhoea, and voided his excrement in bed, Avitliout being



NERVOUS EXHAUSTIOK.

conscious of it; he Jiad a continued discharge of semen; his eyes were fixed and watery, and his pulse low, rapid, and at times almost imperceptible; it Avas Avith much difficulty he Lreatli-ed, and he was reduced nearly to a skeleton. His mind Avas equally disordered, his memory was lost, incapable of forming or connecting his ideas —in short, Avithout reflection or any sensation but pain; he Avas reduced far below tlie brute creation, and presented a spectacle hardly possible to describe. I immediately administered tonic medicine in conjunction Avith anti-spasmodics, Avithout the slightest hope of aifording more than a little temporary relief, and liaving effected this, I declined attempting to remedy further Avhat was past any human aid. He gradually sunk, and for a fcAV days prior to his dissolution, which took place in the middle of August, he lay in a state of unconsciousness, and Avas utterly incapable of taking the least nourishment."

Thanks to the exertions of Medical Science, aided by the researches of many skilful phA'si-cians, Avho Iuxa'c deA'otcd tlieir lives to the investigation of these diseases (amongst others I may be alloAved to recoi-d my late lamented teacher and friend, Lallema^td, as the most scientific and keenest observer, tlic most successful in



KERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

45

practice, and, finally, the most benevolent)— thanks to the important discoveries in chemistry and to the light thrown on the cause of disease l^y the use of the microscope, Ave have not often presented to us cases so desperate as the above. Indeed, during my long experience and extensive practice, I may assert, without hesitation, that no one patient has left my charge without having derived immense benefit from my treatment; and many cases, apparently hopeless, where my patients have been far gone in consumption, where the vital energy has been reduced to the lowest ebb, where generative debility and impuissance have existed for years, have been restored, under Providence, by my remedies to health, strength and manhood.

Still it is difficult to depict a more truly miserable being than the slave to licentiousness. His imagination burning with filthy, unnatural glow; his bodily organs taxed to the utmost, weary and jaded, refuse to obey the stimulus of that never-slumbering depravity which goads his fancy in the darkness of night, in the dreams of his broken rest, and in the worse than dreamy abstractions of the cheerless day; he is tormented with desires he can never gratify, shut out from those enjoyments accorded only to virtuous



NERV0t3 EXTTArsTIOX".

moderation; the l)lossoms of youth (perhaps the flower of manhood) the supremacy of mind, all degraded, obliterated, gone ! Let not the intensely prurient, yet seeming modest victim of self-pollution lay the flattering unction to his soul that from the eye of his fellow-mortals lie can conceal his unmanly practices. It is written upon his forehead; the physiognomy, that faithful mirror of the soul and body, gives clear indication of the internal disorder. The complexioii and plumpness which jointly confer a youthful look, and which is the sole substitute for beauty —for Avithout this even beauty produces no other effect than cold admiration—this complexion and plumpness are the things that fij-st disa])]ieai-; a leanness succeeds; the skin becomes rough, often of leaden tinge; the eyes lose their brilliancv, and by their huiguor express that of the whole frame; the lips lose theirvermillion hue,the teeth their whiteness, the hair falls off, and it is no uncommon thing for the whole body to become bentand distorted. Abashed,thesuffei-ershrinks from the gaze of his fellow-man, fancying suspicion in the eye of every one who looks upon his aunJcen, haggard, pale, unmeaning, ino.r-jiressive face; Jn's dull, lack-lustre eye; his fhin and iretmdo^is form, whicli all be fray him to the



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

47

practised oiserver. For self-pollution entails UPON ITS victim marks AS LEGIBLE, TO THE EYE THAT CAN UNDERSTAND THEM, AS THE

SCARS OP SMALL-POX; and thus proves a striking fulfilment of the prophetic warning—"There is nothing done in secret that shall not be revealed," nor hidden, even from the recognition of mortals, that shall not ultimately be made, even to them, evident as noon-day. Shall we not therefore raise our testimony against these vices? Sir Astley Cooper justly remarks in one of his lectures: " If one of these miserable cases could be depicted from the pulpit as an illustration of the bad effects of a vicious and intemperate course of life, it would, I think, strike the mind with more terror than all the preaching in the Avorld. The irritable state of the patient leads to the destruction of life, and in this way, annually great numbers perish. Undoubtedly, the list is considerably augmented from maltreatment, and the employment of injudicious remedies." And the late learned Dr. Pcrcira, Avhose abilities as a practical pliysician Avere only equalled by his acquired learning and innate knowledge of human nature, observes, in reviewing "Nervous Exhaustion," —"There is a vast deal of injury done, not merely to public



NERVOUS EXHAUSTIO^\

morals, but to the indivicliial health, by the abuses and excesses of the reproductive functions; the primitive fathers and physicians have duly noticed the evils to which I allude, and every experienced medical practitioner can attest their frequent occurrence. It is all very well for sentimentalists and the mock-modest to declaim about the notice of them; but justice, morality, and the preservation of health, as well as the perpetuation of the human race, demand it. Such, however is the hyprocrisy of the day, that even a notice in a dead language is abused and condemned by the ignorant and intolerant, Avho are unable to appreciate the importance of the subject. This is a bold step in the right direction."

'Nov are the evils of self-pollution confined to the male sex only. That it rages with dcathlv virulence among young women, especially among young ladies in the higher circles of society, is

a, matter of notoriety. Dr. Fowler writes.

"Tlnit women, young and apparently modest, are dying by thousands of consum])tion. of female complaints, of nervous or sjiinal eom-])laints, of general debility, and of other ostensible complaints innumerable, and some of insanity, caused solely by this practice.In confirmation of this, Mrs. Gore, in her " Lectures



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

49

to Lficlics on Anatomy and Physiology," remarks,— ,,Some years since, my mind was awakened to examine this subject by the perusal of a medical work that described the bad effects of this vice (masturbation) when practised by females. This was the first intimation I had that the vice existed among our sex; since that time I have had much evidence that it \s fearfully comvion among them. Were this the particular vice of the low and vulgar, there might be more excuse for the apathy and false delicacy that pervades the community resjDecting it; iutit invades all ranks —professed Christians ai"e among its victims. Our boarding and day schools are sources of intolerable mischief." Mrs. Gore is one of those ladies who, throwing aside conventionality, have studied anatomy and medicine; she passed one of the colleges in the United States, and now enjoys an extensive practice, as well as much reputation for skill, in Boston, Mass. On this subject her testimony is of value, and we do not scruple to make use of it. The effect of self-pollution in the male is similar in the female; tlie results common to both are impotency in the one, and sterility or barrenness in the other. We observe amongst them much tendency to historical complaints. Consumption



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

numbers amongst its victims many young and fair, who have first brou-ght on its seed by self-abuse. The glairy discharge, so common and so weakening, and which is generally termed the "Whiies,'' is another frequent result of this error. AVe do not mean to assert that in every instance this discharge is thus caused. I have known many instances where it has been caused by excessive intercourse with the husband; but when it occurs amongs unmarried Avomen of a certain age, self pollution, though not the invariable cause, is one of the most prominent anxl predisposing. But enough on this very painful subject—we probe the wound deeply that Ave may the sooner heal it. Should this fall into the hands of one who has sinned, let her remember that science and skill may do much to restore to health and happiness—let her repent, and pray that "she sin no more."

Many individuals scarcely turned forty years of age, and sometimes even earlier, Avho have lived rather freely, arc not unfrequently about that period of life greatly changed in their powers of sexual intercourse. They may, indeed, in general health and personal appearance, be stout, and for several years not very sensible of the degeneration of their ])omrs, but the frequency



KERVOT^S KXHAUSTION. 81

/-

of their inclination for snch duties gradually becomes much diminished, and that is a symptom which is at all times indicative of approaching impotence; for the inclination gradually aiul entirely ceasing, the power speedily follows, or rather botli are lost together. In others, about the same time of life, the physical power ceases first, and the inclination continuing, often for many years after, they are oliged to gratify themselves in amusements which are the more 'pantnwime of anioj'ouf; indulgences! Such individuals, being otherwise in tolerable health, are recoverable.

Many who have unwarily acquired the habit of self-pollution have been convinced, by reading this treatise, of its iniquity and injurious consequences to health, and have determined to give it up, thinking that by so doing they may recover their pristine health and vigor. In this, hoAvevcr, tliey are deceived. A new and unnatural association having been established between the organs of generation and the mind, the bad consequences of the practice do not cease when the habit is left ofp. Involuntary discharges of semen take place during sleep, occurring as frequently as two or three times in the course of one night. The effect of these



52 NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

*■

emissions is extremely debilitating; all the symjitoms already described are aggravated, and the mind sinks into a state of the deepest dejection. Here there is no time to lose; they should immediately apply for the necessary medicine, and the practice being discontinued (certainly a main point in the case) they may confidently anticipate the speedy renovation of their constitution. I therefoi-e recommend an early application for advice and assistance, which in every case will be given with that kind consideration and undeviated attention that will give confidence to the timid, and restore vigor to the debilitated.



LECTITRE IV.

OF KOCTURNAL EMISSIONS, SEMINAL WEAK-NESS, IMPOTENCE, STERILITY, AND NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

The secretory glands of the human body form an apparatus, tlie action of whicli is unvarying and constant. Tlie liver is perpetually employed in the formation of hile; the kidneys, in the separation of urine from the blood. In fact, all the secretions are derivable from the living and vitalizing fluid. The gall-bladder is provided as the temporary receptacle for the bilious soapy fluid secreted by the liver; and as the wants of the system require, it is poured into the first intestine to assist in the separation of the nutritive portion of the partially digested aliment. Precisely analogous is the action of the testicles, pouring their appropriate secretion -into the receptacles described in the anatomical section of this work, and denominated the "vesi-culce seminales, or seed-Uadders,'' not to be absorbed again into the system, but rather to be excreted as indispensable to the reproductive act. Hence the stwiulus arising from distention of these vessels becomes a pleasurable impulse to the



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

necessary multiplication of the species; and if sexual desire were susceptible of gratification only as the result of instinct; if depraved man, instead of lashing his genital organs to exertion by filthy conversation, lewd and impure imaginations, and the various causes which are entirely absent among the brute creation; if, like them, he were content to follow the dictates of his unerring organization, diseases from excess would be un-knoAvn, equally among us as with them; and their proverbial and almost certain fecundity be but the transcript of our own. As the seminal vessels (like the gall-bladder) Avill not allow of extraordinary distention the ihinner portions of tlie semen become parfialJy absorbed; and though thereby the bulk of tliat secretion be lessened, yet the residuumbecomingmore acrid and stimulating, the impulse to excretion is thus rendered unconquerable; and so nature (in the absence of the act to which the stimulating impulse tends) occasionally relieves herself of the superabundant secretion. Of tliis act, men are mostly unconscious; if, however, it arrest attention, its frequency and its consequences are the circumstances that rouse the proper and natural fears of tlie sufferer. A popular author on this subject obBcrved,—



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

55

" The causes of these nightly or 'wet dreams,^ as they are called, are mwierous. In the first place, the testicles must have acquired, through the practice of Onanism, (for involuntary emissions rarely assume the formidable character here depicted, except induced by masturbation), a morbid sensitiveness, that, on the slightest local or neighboring irritation, they put in action their secretive powers. Iti fact, the infirmity might not inaptly he termed a consuvijjfioii of those glands. Consequently, the causes may be, at this period, piles or hemorrhoids, constipation, indigestion, irritability of the bladder, or kidneys, &c., &c.; for they all, more or less are present, and, perhaps, severally aggravated by stimuli, of one kind or other, taken during the day or pre\aously to rest. Another occasion may be the loss of tone of the absorbents, and also loss of the sensibility of the passages through which the discharge escapes; thereby acting as somnolent sentinels only to the brain, Avhereby even the little control the will might possess is lost! So by this we perceive that this infirmity is not merely local debility of the generative apparatus, but that many other functions of life particij)ate in it. The constant drain from the testicles impoverishes the whole system, and the same phe-



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

nomena ensue as when Onanism is practised to the same extent. The semen of a person tormented with this infirmity is thin, watery, sickly odored and rarely prolific. Although I have already depicted the consequences of unnatural indulgences in the previous pages, the following passage, from a more able pen than my own, exhibits so well the desolating effects alluded to, that its transcript is too useful to my purpose to neglect:—^"The muscles of the youth become soft; he is idle; his body becomes bent; his gait is sluggish, and he is scarcely able to support himself. The digestion becomes enfeebled, the breath fetid; the intestines inactive; the excrements hardened in the rectum, and producing additional irritation of the seminal conduits in its vicinity. The circulation being no longer free, the youth sighs often, the complexion is livid, and the skin, on the forehead especially, is studded with pimples. The corners of the mouth are lengthened, the nose becomes sharp; the sunken eyes, deprived of brilliancy, and enclosed in blue circles, are cast down; no look of gayety remains—the very aspect is criminal. General sensibility becomes excessive, producing tears without a cause; perception is weakened, and memory almost destrojed, Distraction^ or



ITERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

57

absence of mind, renders the judgment unlit for any operation. The imagination gives birth only to fantasies and fears without grounds ; the slighest allusion to the dominating passion produces a motion of the muscles of the face, the flush of shame, or a state of despair. The wretched being finishes by shunning the face of men, and dreading the observation of women. His character is entirely corrupted, or his mind is totally stupefied. Involuntary loss of the reproductive liquid takes place during the night, and also during the daily motions; and there ensues a tot^il exhaustion, bringing on heaviness of the head, singing in the ears, and frequent faintmgs, together with pains, convulsive tremblings, and partial paralysis."

The rejjroductive power may not he eniireh/ dedroyed by that state of generative delnliti/ which is engendered hy nocturnal emissions^ and yet very painful consequences of another character may unquestionably arise. A healthy female may become pregnant, from the feel^k^ yet exhausting eiiort of a man Avhose constitutional power is seriously broken, yet it would be unfair, unphilosophical, unsupported by any analogy drawn from the history of the



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

lower animals, to expect that this circumstauce Avoulcl not tell most powerfully and detrimentally upon the offspring. The opinions of tlie learned, in all ages, have not varied widely on this subject. Lucretius, and a great numl^er of ancient physiologists, admitted this doctrine. That great man considered that there wa,s a mixture of fluids, and that these, united in the sexual organs of the female, were animated, developed, and changed into a being resembling those wlio furnished them. Further, that the most vi(joro7is of the two determined the sex; and if this principle be admitted, it is ea-sy to trace every puny or diseased peculiarity the father or motlier may transmit. It appears to be tlie general opiiiion that whichever parent-furnishes the most elahoraie, the most abundayit seminal fluid would imjjress the lineaments and form- upon the offspring; that tlio most vigorous jjarent wlio would possess most genital power, would determine the sex and physical cliaracter of the infant; and conseqi;ently that offspring would most certainly resemble this ])aront, both ill mind and body. If genital power be equal, the child maybe expected to resemble both. But this can scarcely bo expected, Avhore thoro is debility of flu? generative organs



NERVOUS EXHAUKTiON.

59

in either parent, and the ehiboratiou of imperfect fluids, from their too frequent escape.

Of Semikal Weakness. —The prominent character of Senmial Weakness is general, not ■partial, debility. The seminal vessels are fitted to perform certain functions with progressive regularity, which, if undisturbed by disease, or unimpaired by vicious perversion of the natural sexual habit, they Avill continne to execute through the Avhole range of the years of active manhood. Sexual abilili/ in man is a. mysteriously compound poAver, requiring a perfect association in the action of the secretory organ of the seminal secretion, and the instrument of its ejaculation and discharge. Any functional irregularity, or want of correspondency between the action of the testicles and penis, is therefore an unquestionable state of disease; for since both are so closely and intimately dependent on each other, the least Avant of exactness in their adaptation might be the cause of Impotence. Whatever be the mode in which this deviation from the healthy and natural action of the parts is first induced, it is not difiicult to trace its inevitable effect in the production of Seminal DeMlity and the ultimate destruction of sexual power. Irrita-



NEBVOUS EXHAUSTION.

tion, however engendered, rapidly propagates itself along the uretlva; and chronic inflammation of the prostatic and most sensitive portion of that canal is rapidly established, and the muscles surrounding the membranous division of the urinary passage are sympathetically alfected with irregular spasm. The irritation extends itself by continuity of surface to the seminal vesicles, and even to the testicles, producing in the former unnatural evacuations, and in tlie latter an exaggerated thin secretion, too rapidly elaborated, and therefore, for all the purposes of generation, worthless.

Among individuals so alfected (on attempting intercourse with the sex) the emissio?i is too quickly discharged, nocturnal pollutions are frequent (indeed these are often the immediate precursors of seminal weakness) or the semen is expelled during the evacuation of the Madder and ioioels. With some, there is more or less complete extinction of venereal desire, llie erections become few and feeble, incom])letc, or absolutely impossible. This condition of the sexual organs has its ajjpropriate general character, analogoi;s to those which are attributable to the wilful and determinate jiollutions



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

61

of earlier youth ; the sufferer, now perhaps too late, sensibly aliv.e to the origin of his weakness, becomes timid, fearful, careless of the world around him, his mind absorbed in the consideration of his malady, until the continual presence and recurrence of the same train of painful thought inyolve him in the worst form of mooiomania, or rather the premature childishness of old age. All the functions of the body languish and are deranged, until a complete and general degredation sweeps with uncontrolled dominion over every poAver and faculty, both of body and soul. The seminal fluid may dribble away without jjleasicre, without erections, without the natural ejaculation and its loss, when occurring in this manner, gives rise to the same or infinitely greater evils than those which occur from mere sexual excess, or what is worse, from self pollution.

The term Impotence is applied as relative to that inal)ility or incapacity to the performance of the sexual act, wliich may arise from a variety of causes, but from none so frequently as the excesses of Sensualism, more especially the secret, vicioiis, and solitary indulgences of self-pollution. It is important, in a practical jDoint of view, that we do not confound this condition



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

of the generative system with Stekiuty, inasmuch as a male who is sterile, or a barren female, may possess a perfect aptitude for coition, though for all the purposes of procreation absolutely incapable. In Impotence there is a temporary or permanent destruction of those powers which are absolutely essential for generative purposes. Sterility may therefore be defined as inability to propagate the species, though not to affect the sexual congress; while Impotejicy in either sex, whether natural or acquired, whether as the result of disease or malformation, entirely precludes its pierformance. Impotence, resulting from physical imperfection of the sexual organs, is mostly incurable; but when originating in such disorders of the urinary or genital apparatus as are traceable to irritation or inflammation of those structures, or to conditions however produced, tlience resulting, such as thickening of the bladder, enlargement of the prostate glands or testicles, wasting of the penis, especially long-continued gleets and strictures, our first efforts are naturally directed to the removal of those proximate causes of Impotence; and if the habit bo siill indulged, the baneful, ultimate, or priman/ cause of so severe a deprivation. If, under those



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

63

circumstances, Nature do not readily reassume lier wonted functions, if there be remaining debility, it is necessary to invigorate the frame by the employment, not merely of those diffusable stimuli which act generally upon the whole system, but by the administration of remedies which are known to act immediately upon the generative organs. If there be present excessive irritability, it is necessary to employ such remedies as tend to diminish irritation in the morbidly sensitive organs.

The causes of Impotence in man arise from two soiirces—from vicious malformation of the genitals, or from want of power; but among women. Impotence can only depend on malformation, either natural or acquired. These causes are more commonly observed in man than in the other sex, and this is easily accounted for by the greater part the male has to perform in the nuptial congress. This is evident from the phenomena which gave the virile men\ber the form and disposition proper for erection, the introduction of the organ, and the ejaculation of the semen, which are effected by a violent and complicated action, requiring a concurrence of many indispensable conditions, the organs not only contracting apasmodioally



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

to effect the expulsion of the male fluid, hut all the hody participating at this moment in a strange convulsion, as though nature at the instant forgot every other function. It will l)e .obvious that the treatment must admit of wide modification, as Impotence may be ahsolute or relative, constitutional or local, direct or indirect, transient or ajyparently jyermanent. Many defects of conformation are sufficient, more or less completely, to interfere with the sexual act; among men, preternatural length, closure, or adhesion of the foreskin, constituting^;//?//»o.«i'.s' (whicli may be either congenital or the result of disease.) Cancerous or scirrhous enlargement of the prostrate is frequent in advanced life, and forms another obvious physical bar to copulation Among females, adhesion of the sides of the vagina is not so common as an imperforate state of the hymen, which occassionally closes so completely the entrance to the internal organs, that the menstrual secretion has been known to ac. cumulate behind that membrane, and for wan) of the natural outlet, the cavity of the Avomb has naturally assumed a distention closely simulating that of pregnancy. Some, from constitutional frigidity, are impotent; thus wo read that Zenobia, Q,ueen of Palmyra, only admitted



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION".

65

her husband's embraces once a montli, and then solely in relation to posterity ; it is doubtful Avhether under such circumstances her sense of duty ^vould atone for the absence of inclination. Excessive venery, and the profuse discharges of flvor albus, or the whites, are susceptible of completely destroying all jiowcr of excitement in women; hence prosHhifes, from over-stiimi-latmi of the generative organs, seldom conceive. Tra?isieni impotence is often the result of mere apprehension. Too eager desires, too ardent imagination, the ecstatic effect produced by the sight of a beloved object, extreme nervous susceptibility, are often sufficient to produce temporary impotence.

It i« not unusual to meet with instances of married people becoming quite indifferent to each other's embraces. A patient of mine confessed to me his inability to complete the sexual act with his wife, unless, by an effort of the fancy, imagination conjured up the form of some more voluptuous female. Physical defect onay constitute the cause of impotence, but more frequently there is neither organic defect nor local disease ; the affection is a mere nervous suspension of poAver, which is soon removed under proper management. Even this has its



NEEVOUS EXHAUSTION.

wise ordination. Any individual, however ner-vons in his physical capacity, if he anticipate with too intense eagerness intercourse Avith a beloved object, will seldom perform tJie act well. Even amcmg the most ardent and powerful, it occurs, as many liave confessed, that after Avaiting time after time for opportunity, when that has arrived, they have not had the power to take advantage of it; a nervous anxiety, a tremulous delight absolutely indefinable, has completely throAvn prostrate all power, and the object of passion has been saved from perdition by its paralyzing all the fire and ardency of animal desire. If the imagination Avander from the tasV, temporary Im/iwfence is the result ; and many Avriters are firmly of opinion that impregnation is often impeded from the presence of ideas Avliich interfere with the due performance of the generative act. Sterne has happily commented on this point in one of his most popular Avorks, introducing liis maternal parent as asking at a most viitimeJi/ moment, whether his "father had not forgotten to wind irp the clock." His views are strictly physiological. Such is tlie power of the moral over the physical state of man !



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

67

Impotence in the male may arise, then, from a Avide diversity of conditions. Incuj^acity of erection, generally referable to self-pollution ; Imx^otence, arising from a want of poAver of retention in the seminal vessels, induced by a morliid susceptibility of those vessels, and biouglit about in like manner by a persistence in the same vicious practice ; Impotence, from inability of retention resnlting from repletion of these vessels, all demand a variety of treatment peculiar to the jrrecisc condition of the joarts. Impotence from mental influence has also its appropriate management. Exclusive of this, the generative infirmity under consideration, though occasionally arising from simple disease, is ascribable in by far the greater majority of instances to the excesses of Sensualism, either with women, or, moi'c commonly still, from iliat vile excess to Avhich such frecptent allusion has been made in these pages. Long-protracted chastity or continence is not to be overlooked as a cause of Impotence: the veiy reverse 'of the degrading habit of self-pollution, it is not only comparatively rare, but offers in its very nature the indications of cure. But that long-continued debauchery, whether Avith women or by masturbation, is to be assigned as



NEKVOUS EXHAUSTION.

the most common and prominent of the causes of Impotence, is a fact admitted hy all systematic Avriters, and amply and painfully confirmed by my own experience. Mons. Pincl observes,—" The Impotence caused by ilie la/lcr excess reduces youth to the n ullity of old aye, and is too often incurable.''' Fortunately, tlie records of a numerous list of cases prove that recovery of the powers of manhood is not (under judicious management) so altogether hopeless, as might seem to be the fact, trusting only to the observation of those medical men who have made these subjects their peculiar and exclusive studies.

Impotence is often caused by debility of the genital organs, induced by precocious venereal enjoyments, or by the unresti-aincd abuse of the delicate structures in any method that tends to produce repeated and severe evacuations of the seminal fluid. If impotence result from self-pollution, there is a want of erection, and should ii seminal emission take i»laee, the semen does not possess its prolilic power, and thus the man is at once Impotent and Steiui.e. This form of impotence is truly deplorable, and unfortunately it is the most prevalent variety : nevertheless, the author has cured many j^crsons la-



KEBVOUS EXHAUSTION.

69

boring under tills distressing complication, al-tliougli several involuntary dlurmd as well as nocturnal emissions have regularly occurred without amorous impulse. Next to Self-polhi-tion, EXCESSIVE VENEEY is a frequent cause of impotence, as well as of sterility among the male sex. This is a freciuent cause of want of offspring in young married 2)erso7is, In tlieso cases, the semen may escajje without the aid of the ejaculatory muscles, is imperfect in quality, devoid of power until the health be improved; or, if impregnation ensues, the child undouljt-edly partakes of the debility of the parent, soon to be consigned to a premature grave, the victim of that nameless airopliy or wasting decay wliich hurries thousands- of ijifants annually to the tomb. In these cases tlic male parent generally suffers from inliammatiou of the seminal vesicles; or there is a seminal weakness, with moi-e or less involuntary discharge.

The surest means by which sound and vigorous children may be engendered in a good constitution, unenfcebled by excessive waste of those ])owers which in their assemblage constitute the manifestation of the living principle. It is admitted, not merely by philosophic writers who Inive speculated deeply upon the subject,



NEUVOUS EXHArSTIOjNT.

but by ull wlio hiivc paid the least attention to the facts connected with such a statement, that not merely the ^j/i?/sicffZ bnt the moral dispositions of the parents are transmitted by generation ; hence, if a sonnd mind in a sound body be the first, greatest, and most lasting blessing, and its deprivation or absence the greatest possible curse, how imperatively necessary is the obligation to calculate closely the tendency of vicious indulgences, to avoid the contamination of depraved habits, and to correct and elude the consequences of that debility already imposed upon the generative organs by sensual excess ! ImpotejsTCE and Stekility are nsualhj the results of wilful imprudence. Malformation is a direct interposition of creative wisdom ; its occurrence is comparatively rare ; hut failing poiver is not only exceedingly common, hut generally constitutes a self-inflicted evil. Diseased and delicate parents procreate diseased and weakly offspring. The same results are observed in plants and animals. Can it be supposed that the physical powers, the sympathies of a beautiful woman of an excellent constitution arc in unison with those of a man Avhose best energies Avere long ago expended in the premature and illicit excesses of lawless excitement, whose



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

71

youth has been a huiTied history of wild enjoyment, whose passions have been hxslied past tlie natural powers of his bodily organization, and Avho now brings his decrepid elforts as a worthless otfering at the shrine of matrimonial sanctity ? Or worse still—is there a mockery more deep, more bitter, than that desolation of spirit which an afPectionate woman must feel on finding she clasps, entwined within her circling embrace, the mere Avreck of Sensualism, the horrible victim of self-pollution ; the creature Avho, having trained his imagination and bodily powers to mere fancied enjoyments, is noAV deprived almost, if not entirely, of the capability of resuming the actions for which his generative organs Avere destined ? AVoman's scorn must be the more intense, because from the very nature of her own position she is precluded ■' from giving vent to her feelings of anger and vexation. Love cannot be reciprocal in such cases ; animal or organic impulse Avill prefer that Avhich is more accordant Avitli itself ; even beasts prefer males which are possessed of vigor, power, and beauty, and this instinct is implanted by Nature in all animals. AVhatever pei*-version civilization may effect in our feelings or manners, it cannot cxtiiiguisli this instinct.



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

And this is an eminently Avise ordination, as tending to the perpetnity of a healtliy race of human beings.

If Sensualism have impaired the powers, not of both parents, but of one onlj-, the punishment of the offence is either Sterility or de-hility; or pain, disease, and deatli transmitted to the chiklren, and reflected back witli sorrow upon the parents. Tmpotence, tlien, is tlie last crowning scourge of sexual ■imperfeciion, and demands for its removal tl/e most cautious application of tlie resources of tlie liealiiig art. Tlie treatment of the chronic diseases of tlie genc-I'ative system has been strangely neglected and signally misunderstood. The eflicacy of well-directed efforts lias been much mistrusted iu this matter, and it is remarkable that lioth the patient and practioner contribute to these impediments : for as the latter has been accustomed to see his remedies speedy in their effects, ho is himself discouraged if they do not immediately produce the desired benefit. Xor is il any wonder that the patient becomes incredulous of the promised relief, neither of them recollecting that the morbid states Inive been slowly pi-oduccd, and cannot therefore be speedily changed.



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

73

Self-pollution, the frequent cause of sexual Impotence and Sterility, is generally the habit of the best years of youthful life ; and its deadening impress often tells with deplorable certainty, long after the baneful habit has been re-Jinquishcd. Time must therefore be afforded for the rectihcation of that artificial state into which the powers of the system has been Avan-tonly plunged. It is evidently the absence of fixed principles, in our pathology of the slow diseases of the generative system, that has given such unbridled license to quacTcery. There has always existed a vagueness of opinion respecting their nature, and an unsettled doctrine as to the most rational methods to be adopted for their mitigation and cure. The communication of disordered action is an inevitable result of indulgence in any mode of Sensualism, either excessive, or contrary to the order of nature and the constitution of our being; and the nature of that perverted action may be readily anticipated. In fact, we see it exemplified in excessive irritability of the bladder and seminal vesicles, producing incapability for retention, disease of the spinal marrow and brain, spasm of the urethra, and stricture, an effeminate flaccidity of the penis, testicles, and scrotum.



NBltVOUS EXHAUSTION.

Can it be expected that these organs sliould be capable under such circumstances of fulfilling their appropriate office in the task of procreation ? Most assuredly not. Where impoteuce is consequent vpon that lianef ul propeiisity, lohich cannot le sufficiently stigmatized, its extent of severity is far greater than when produced hy excessive indulgence vnth women, because the vital fluid that could have improved the stamina of the system has been lost without satisfaction; . consequently no gratification of the mind has been had in counterpoise to compensate, and in some measure to repair the expenditure of power.

The man who, from his anxiety to indulge to the utmost his libidinous propensities, seeks for variety among women, may certainly find in such variety a new stimulus sufficient for the occasion, and may be able to accomplish more frequent repetitions of the sexual act than the sober married man who is faithful to one ; but we cannot overlook the fact that this is undoubtedly accomplished at the expense of a corresponding amount of unnatural excited energy, and the ultimate results of such efforts tell with fearful and tremendous horrors upon the helpless and debilitated votary of greedy pleasure. The nightly partner of a husband's Ijcd silently



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

75

offers only that gratification which is demanded by the sexual organs, Avhen fnlly charged with the seminal fluid and impatient for relief ; to such a man, tha stimulus of variety is unsought, contemned, forbidden, as contrary not merely to all laws, human and divine, but as directly opposed to his well-being, to the maintenance of his animal organization in health, strength, and usefulness. Here, then, the natural laws of his physical constitution harmonize most admirably with the liiglier sanctions of morality. The actual amount of enjoyment realized by the temperate is, in the long run, far greater; power is maintained until old age, and a vigorous offspring is engendered ; Avhile the hasty, violent, and forced gratifications of the Sensualist, though vivid for a moment, are succeeded by that worst form of helplessness— insatiable desire, appended to diseased an d powerless organs. The draining of the seminal fluid Avhich occurs either from excessive indulgence in venereal gratifications, or from solitary vice, is not equally great in every instanoe. There are some individuals Avho are not rendered absolutely, but only partially Impotent. They can accomplish the sexual acts occasionally, and Avith severe effort, to the disgust, doubtless, of the female,



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

or they are tolerably able, yet unprolific. Their powers are weakened, not altogetlier destroyed. These patients have rescnirces left in surgical shill, which, if expended in contending against impro]jer or vnslcilfvl ireatment, are lost

POREVER.

-The debility produced l)y masturbation starts a difficulty in the choice of remedies Avhich does not occur in other cases ; to excite, yet not irritate, this is the point of divergency, where cautions sciejice leaves blundering quackery to pur-sue her Uioid injurious course. It is a law of animal organization, that when motion is increased, the increase is most considerable in those parts which are most susceptible, and these, among Sensualists, are the parts of generation ; therefore, the effects of irritating remedies are most sensibly and instantly felt in these parts, enforcing the utmost circumspection not merely in the selection, but in the administration and employment of medical agents. Thus, Sterility may be in some cases only apjiarent. Altliough it is perfectly true that, in a few instances, the uterine system of tlie female mav be insensible to the seminal stimulus of a particular individual, yet capable of being acted ujDon by another, the lapse of a little time is



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

77

often sufficient (if there have been no debilitating causes in operation Ufore marriage) to dissipate groundless fear; and such being the truth, it becomes doubly important, not only tliat proper treatment be adopted Avhere al)so-lutely demanded, but that science should determine whether any or what kind of interference be really necessary. Offspring is frequently denied to newly-married persons from eagerness in its pursuit. The consequences of excessive venery in these, whom warm passion has united in its indissoluble tie, amount only to the defeat of their wishes. Celsus remarked upon this subject more than eighteen centuries ago: " Rarus concuhitus cor2ms exbitaf, fre-qucns solvitf Avhich may be freely translated, " The bodily powers are excited by occasional coition, by frequent repetition they become relaxed," and consequently unprolific; or as a poet has expressed the same sentiment—■

" While temperate pleasure spurs the lazy blood, Excess unstrings the nerves, iind dries the flood."

and so truly is it witlrin the experience of many, that when the first warm anxiety for offspring, and its corresponding efforts, have passed away and subsided, the blessing is granted to less passionate, exciting, and frequent embraces.



NERVOUS EXHAUSTIOis-.

The ancient pliysioians uere right in their general rule : the longer parties abstain, tlie more quickly they generate. Almost all pliy-siologists noAV agree that the retention of semen for some few days, or tem^Jorary abstinence from coition, is necessary to generation. Duringmij practice, many persons Jf ave consiMed me on account of want of family, winch entirely arose from this cause. Such cases require great delicacy in their investigation, liut it is not difficult to learn their nature when science, caution and sympathy ai'C duly exerted. Conjttgal, domestic and social incom^eniences mustahvays be aroid-ed ; and it is scarcely to be observed, because of its obvious truth, that excessive sexual cnjoy-m.e7it relaxes both pa7'ties, and may, even in the married state, defeat its own and, lie unfruitful, from too frequent repetition ; and bring on that atony, Aveakness, and debility of the generative organs, which may end in sterility in tlic female and impotence in the male.

If these things be so (and who will dare to contravene their truth, founded as it is on tlie ordinary cvery-day observation of mankind ?) it follows that there are, and ma}' be, varieties of SEMINAL WEAKNESS, originating most commonly in NOCTLiHXAL KMissTONS, and tlicsc, dc-



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

79

pendent in many instances (but not invariably so) on the unnatural practice of self-pollution; to wliieJi sucli ample reference has been made in the foregoing pages. That these eviis-sions lead to the most deplorable consequences, independently of the injury doiie to the genera-*tiYe function, is indisputable. The most studious people, and tliose of splenetic cast, are subject to this infirmity, and the discharge of semen is commonly so considerable, that tliey fall into a slow wasting consumption. A Roman physician (whose opinion is supported by John of Acarius, author of a work composed for the Emperor) observes, '• //' nocturnal emissions co/ifinne any time, the necessary consequences arc consumption and death; for the most balsamic part of the human and aninuil spirit is dissipated ; the whole body falls away, and particularly the back ; the patients become feeble, dry, and pale ; they languisli in sIoav melancholy agony." Let this antiquated, yet terrifically correct portraiture, deter tlie thoughtless from practices which lead to such a state ; and those in Avhom it is commencing, let not incipient evil be deemed unworthy of their most serious consideration.



LECTURE V.

THE MORAL AXD PHYSICAL EFFECTS OF SELF-ABUSE—SPERMATOBRHCEA—IMPOTESTCE.

All the faculties are weakened by indulgence in this vice. The sense of hearing loses its acutencss, and uiuch annoyance is caused by noiscs and singing in the ears ; sometimes even deafness results. The eyes lose their brilliancy, end appear dull ; tlie pupils are always more or less dilated. According to Eichter—one of the most eminent of sui-gical authorities—" JSfo general ivealcening causes ojperate tqjon the ei/es and occasion total hlindness so powerfully and so often as 2J>'emature and excessive indulgences in venereal pleasures.^' Another of the evils resulting from self-pollution is a failure in the power of the mind, especially tlie memory. In short, it may be stated Avith the utmost conlidence that tiiei-e is not an intellectual faculty with wiiich tlie beneficent Creator has blessed us that is not liable to bo imjDaired by these causes. It is a curious fact that the habit of self-pollution is invariably foUoAved by a diminution in the size of the penis. Tlie organ shrinks to one-half its former outline, or, in those Avho have practised



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

81

it in youth, does not attain to full growth. The power of perfect erection is altogetlier destroyed ; when coition is attempted, the requisite solidity is not maintained, or if an entrance into the A-agina be partially etfected, it is followed by a premature emission. Let not the victim of secret vice flatter himself his unmanly act escapes detection. Dr. Armstrong observes— " I think I should know a person in the streets who has addicted himself to this vice, by merely walking behind him, from his peculiar gait."

From the commencement of the unfortunate habit of self-pollution, which is invariably the cause of seminal weakness, there is frequently a loss of desire for sexual intercourse ; or Avhere the desire is felt, a repetition of the unmanly habit is preferred to coition in a natural way. This, when persisted in, causes the face to become pale, bloated, and cadaverous, the body feeble and emaciated, and an impeded circulation in the extremities. Then occur trembling hands, dim eyes, confused ringing in the ear, sometimes deafness, accompanied Avith frequent and violent headache. A nervous dread and loss of energy are very common, and Ave have frequently heard patients confess that they have walked their rooms for hours together at night.



fcai-iiig to go to bod. This is often o:q;crieiice(I when tlio ]iocturn;il seminal emissions are numerous. We may liere observe that tlte practice of Onanism may sometimes be indul^'-ed in without apparent ill effects for a time. Some are affected in a month or two, some may escape for years ; but not any entirely escape, for it is impossible to violate any law of Xature and of ISTature's God without evil consequences resulting. The practice of Onanism is a moral and physical crime, consequently the punisliment is twofold. Thus, Avhile the bodily vigor is lost, and the senses lose their keenness, the inind also becomes affected, the memory fails, the judgment becomes defecti^-e, and the patient becomes unable to any exertion, bodily or mental. Such is the history of many cases of suicide of Avhich we read in the newspapers ; cases mysterious, at first sight causeless, but understood by the educated physician, regarding them by the clear light of science. Tissot, the celebrated physician and early writer on this subject, states the result of this jn-actice to be. First :—Total derangement of the stomach, shown in loss or irregularity of appetite and indigestion. In some cases the appetite bo-comes almost voracious ; Nature tiius endeav-



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

83

oiu-ing to xeinm- the loss inflicted upon her. Second :—AYeakness of the respiratory organs ; whence frecpiently result dry coughs, almost almost always colds, weakness of the voice, and sense of sufiocation on slight exertion. Third : —General relaxation of the nervous system, lassitude by day, painful dreams by night; the sleep is unrefreshing. Fourth :—Great debility of the organs of generation ; almost all complaining of only imperfect erections ; desire no longer exists, and impotence results. Nocturnal emissions are a terrible scourge to these sufferers, and often overwhelm those even whose organs are absolutely senseless when awake. AVhcn these patients have had nocturnal pollutions, they find themselves the next day in a state of depression, of discouragement, debility, ennui, and lassitude, Avith pains in the loins, head, and eyes. Fifth :—Eruptions frequently appear on the face and forehead ; the features become changed from the rosy hue of health to a dull, heavy, and sallow complexion.

We will conclude this part of the subject Avith a few Avords respecting spermatorrhoea and impotence. Tliis term spermatorrhcea is derived from two Greek Avords, signifying a flowing of seed, and is applied to all cases in Avhioh an



emission of tlie seed takes place, excepting from coition ; in other Avords, spermatorrlia'a may be termed an involnntary loss of the semen. Tlie nsual causes of this disease are self-pollution, hut it may also he the result of immoderate indulgence in coition, of ill-cured gleet, and frequently of disease of the prostrate gland. Constipation of the bowels, and the irritation of the rectum caused by piles, may also predispose. But after all, the influence of these causes is insignificant compared Avith that of self-abuse. The symptoms of spermatorrhoea may be divided into local and constitutional. The local sym])-toms are generally emissions of seed at night; and we call the particular attention of our readers to this rule. Nocticrnal emissions are decided signs of dehility and symptoms of ap-proacliing impotence. Let it be remembered that every drop that escapes is the habitation of living beings, a particle of the living seed, and that one drop, under favorable circumstances, is suflficient to give life to a future being. "With respect to diurnal emissions—which occur at stool, Avhilst making water, or which are evident in a continual moisture and humidity of rhe organs—they are of a com]ilioated character, and in many instairces are undiscovered and



KERV0US3 EXHAUSTION.

85

unsuspected b}'' tlie patient until the disorder lias assumed a most formidable character ; for he is quite unconscious of any seminal loss. The nocturnal emissions sometimes leave him entirely, the drain by day being so excessive; but at last some formidable symptoms force him to seek relief at the eleventh hour. During the progress of spermatorrhea many patients suffer from a hard dry cough, a difficulty of breathing, pains in the chest, and hence are treated for consumption ; for the constitutional symptoms of spermatorrhoea are innumerable, and when the cause of disease is unknown and unsuspected, the general practitioner will naturally attack the symptoms. The appetite, at first, will frequently increase and become voracious—it is the effort nature makes to support the failing strength. All the senses are more or less affected—the eye loses its brillianc}^, there is always more or less dilatation of the pupil, and the very look of the ])atient reveals his secret to the glance of experience. The penis and testicles become small and relaxed ; and a high surgical authority observes, the infirmity may not inaptly be termed a consumption of these glands. And we cannot be astonished at the frightful effects caused by un-



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

natural emissions of seed, when we recollect that physicians of all ages are agreed that the loss of one ounce of semen by self-abuse, nocturnal emissions, or at stool, injures the system and weakens it more than the abstraction of twelve ounces of blood. In the early stages of seminal weakness, different persons are variously affected ; some are incapable of procuring a discharge of semen into the cavity of the female genitals in a natural way, though they may effect temporary erection ; while others cannot perform the act of copulation, from the emission taking place too quickly, and before the proper firmness of the male organ has enabled it to effect the requisite penetration. To recapitulate briefly the results of our expe.iience:—Impotence, the effect of long-continued sperma-torrhcea, is the inability to perform the venereal act. Those cases are most difficult to cure which have been caused by self-pollution ; but science, combined with skill and experience, Avill almost effect miracles, and our treatment of these cases has been moct successful. Impotence is also caused by too free indulgence in sexual pleasures ; these cases can be cured with comparative ease by rest and tonic medicines. Impotence is sometimes the result of moral



NERVOUS EXHAUSTIOK.

87

causes—nervousness, too much respect, &c.; the treatment is obvious. Impotence, then, is chiefly caused by debility of the genital organs; there is a Avant of erection, and if a seminal emission takes place, the semen docs not possess its prolific power, and the man is at once impotent and sterile. Sterility, or barrenness, is sometimes the vice of female organization, and is produced by various causes ; amongst others which entail a loss of vital and productive energy, excessive indulgence is one of the most prominent. Excessive venery is a frequent cause of want of offspring in young married people. In these cases the seed does liot ac-qwive suflicient vitality to stimulate the ovum in the womb ; and even if a child should come to life, it partakes of the debility of the parent, and is soon hurried to a premature grave, the victim of that nameless atrophy or wasting away which kills its thousands of infants annually. Impotence and sterility are usually the result of wilful imprudence. Malformation is very rare ; but failing power is not only exceedingly common, but generally constitutes a self-inflicted evil. The author is frequently consulted by those contemplating marriage, and whenever bad habits have existed, or weakness



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

IS experienced, the precaution is most Avise, and may prevent much future unhappiness. Like-vise, as respects the married man, it often occurs that a few minutes' confidential conversation with one who has made these subjects a special study is attended lo^y the hapjiiest results. There are resources in the science of medicine, and few, very fcAv, need despair of restoration to the power of manhood. But we will refrain from further details ; our object is friendly suggestion, not importunate dictation. We will conclude this chapter with a few words of the celebrated Lallemand:—" Many diseases, when left to themselves, Avork their oavu cure, providing only they be not exasperated by the imprudence of the patient. This is not the case Avith spermatorrha?a, chiefly, perhaps, because the effects produced by the disease itself are favorable to the increase of involuntary discharges. The natural tendency of this disease to become aggravated, as the resuU of its own effects, frequently leads to a fatal termination. The patients generally expire in one of the attacks of syncope that folloAV congestion of the brain. In this Avay such of the insane Avho have fallen into a state of dementia usually cx])ire. Many die from diseases (as consumption, &c.)



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

89

aggravated and inflamed by unsuspected sper-matorrlioea ; the symptoms are treated by the physician, but the great cause, spermatorrha3al remains unsuspected."

MODERN TREATMENT OF SPERMATORRHCEA, SEMINAL WEAKNESS AND NERVOUS DEBILITY.

Like many other intractable diseases, spermatorrhoea has been the "opprobrium medicorum" of the rcguhir practitioner. From its tedious-ness, the medical man is wearied of it; and like an obstinate gleet, after trying all possible remedies, has given it up in despair. Nor is this altogether to be wondered at, when we consider the extreme difficulty of the diagnosis, excepting by microscopic observations ; and to xise the microscope in these cases with effect requires skill, care, experience, and a thorough knoAvledge of the disease. Spermaton-hoea is a drainage, a waste, a dribbling away of the seminal fluid. As already explained, it may exist unknown, and, consecpiently, unattended to until great mischief has been inflicted on the constitution and vital powers. Now, what are the indications of treatment ? Naturally, to . give tone to the vessels tluu neglect their office; to prevent the too profuse secretion of tho



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

impovorislied fluid ; to esablish a healthy reliance between the two ; to remove the provoking causes that brought about the first estrangement ; to repair the mischief done to the general health ; to cultivate the mind into a higher notion of its importance, and thereby withhold the irritating consequences of disordered imagination. The treatment, then, of spermatorrhea and its accompanying afl'ections, mental and physical, may be divided into—First:— Local and Constitutional; Second:—J/oraZ and Dietetic. The first step on which we must insist is the relinquishing of those practices which have occasioned the disease. This is essential; the most careful and the most scientific treatment must otherwise increase the mischief, and, by giving greater temporary strength, en-uhle the patient to inflict on himself more permanent evils. A due attention to air, exercise, sleep, and regimen is ni all cases proper, and entirely within the control of the patient. A local remedy of great value is cold water ; the sponge-bath or shower-bath should be used in the morning, a small quantity of bay salt being d issolved in tlic water. Coarse towcllins: and flesh-brushes should be used after the bath ; a suspensory bandage should be used ; the diet



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

91

should be generous, but not stimulating, animal food in moderation, and he should cat a little and often, rather than take too full a meal. Exercise must not be neglected, moderate at first, and gradually augmented. Stimulating drinks are improper, spirits in all cases hurtful; a glass or two of Avine may be taken if demanded by preyious habit. In this case a pale dry sherry Avill be best. With respect to medicines, a sketch only of the treatment can be offered. Cases vary so Avidely, that the curative means must be varied accordingly. The class of drugs which allay excitement and irritability are first likely to be required, for the stomach is so weakened and capracious that the disease is frequently mistaken for indigestion. Mild and Cordial laxatives, alterative drugs, Avitli neutral salts, febrifuges, and sedatives, will soon quiet the system, and enable it to tolerate tonic or restorative medicines,which if commenced with are decidedly injurious. But what is the meaning of tonic ? for no Avord is so much misapplied. One man means quinine, another iron, a third the mineral acids, wliilst a fourth means stimulants, and so on through the whole Pharmacopoeia. Now, we mean, not any one, but the whole class of medicines combined, clianged,



NEEVOUS EXHAUSTION.

increased, or diminished to suit the particular case; in this consists the real art of scientific prescribing. One man gradually gathers strength from quinine, which would not suit another, whose deteriorated blood-globules will become red and healthy under the exhibition of iron, in some of its numerous preparations. The peculiarity of our treatment consists not only in the selection of hitherto undiscovered remedies, but in the practical adaptation of those Ave already possess. And the above are but a few of the remedies we emjjloy in generative diseases or debility. Amongst the most certain and most valuable for the total cure of spermatorrhoea—Avhich control that disease comj^letely, even when caused by long continued habits of self-abuse—are medicines whose very names are unknown to the general practitioner. Under the tropical suii of India, in Thibet, and the mountainous ranges of Korth-eastern Hindustan, in tlie forests of Ceylon, are found plants and herbs grown from the virgin soil, rich in balsamic virtues, aromatic and cordial. India, the land of ancient civilization, the original home of medicine, still retains secrets which baffle the wisdom of learned physicians. Who lias not read and wondered at the marvel-



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

93

Ions stories of the power and influence exerted by the " Old Man of the Moimtiiins ?" The means by which he exerted his influence, by which he retained the power of life and death over his followers, by which he comjielled them to the most desperate enterprises, were comprised simply in his knowledge of the herbs, flowers, and grasses under his feet. Have these wondrous gifts of Nature now lost their virtue? I boldly answer, No ! I am in possession of remedies marvellous in their influence, most effective in their result, by Avhicli I control the worst cases of disease and debility, and whicli. account in a measure for the extraordinary success I have met with in special practice. So when Debility has weakened the mental faculties ; when a long course of dissipation and solitary habits has destroyed enterprise, energy, and courage ; when a man feels that he is a wreck in body and in mind, and dares not even own it to himself—surely in such cases these remedies are called for. And no man can treat successfully the diseases described in these pages whose medicines are limited to those contained in the American Pharmacopoeia. It is a question often asked—Is sexual intercourse indispensable to health ? The reply may be



NERVOUS EXl^AL■s'^^u^■.

taken that at least Nature destined the act of generation for procreative purposes, and that not only should it contribute to the delight of numkind, hut also to their health. Ilence copulation is permissible and necessar\-, extreme chastity frequently injurious ; and we often find it advisable to recommend marriasre. It should also be remembered that copulation should never be an eSort. This is a golden rule, and where great languor, droAvsiness, depression, and a feeling of jdiysical exhaustion follow the act, the time chosen has been inapt, or the limits have been exceeded. We will conclude this j)art of the subject Avith a few words respecting treatment. Having enjoyed for many years the friendship of the late celebrated Lallemand during our residence in Paris, our practice in cases of spermatorrhoea has necessarily been most extensive. The peculiarit_y of our treatment is to act directhj on the seminal vessels, to strengthen without exciting, and so restore health by removing the cause of disease. It would be easy to recommend various remedies ; but medicine in the hands of the timid, the irresolute, or the ignorant, is more likely to i^roducc evil than advantage. In all cases let the best advice be sought from one who has



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

95

■}))ade these diseases a sjjecial study. Some may l)e prevented from applying for assistance from dread of accidental exposure ; it may, therefore, be proper to remark, that it is our rule to destroy all correspondence at the termination of each case ; or, if preferred, to return it to the wiiters. Inviolable secrecy and certain relief are the boons we offer to suffering humanity. Unfortunately, practitioners in this country have long been averse to selecting this branch of medical art as a study ; maiiy distinguished men have risen to fame and atffnence by devoting their talents to midwifery, operative surgery of the eye and ear, &c. The author of this treatise is content to brave the sneers of the ignorant and envy of the malicious, when he reflects on the gratitude of those whom he has rescued from an untimely grave ; he knows that in selecti]ig this peculiar department of medicine his usefulness has been increased, and that he deserves Avell of his fellow-men.

ON CERTAIN URETHRAL DISCHARGES.

"We shall not here consider the gonorrhceal discharge, as that is treated on in another joart of the work. There are, however, other discharges, and of a soi-ious nature, which often



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

call for skilful and attentive treatment. The first of these is termed gleet, Avhich is the consequence of an ill-cured or neglected gonorrhoea or clap. There is another discharge, a discharge of semen, without sensation, which is the result of a debilitated frame, and is frequently induced by long-continued self-iDollu-tion, or long residence in hot or cold climates. The penis is invariably damp and clamm}-; there is a slight mucous discharge rather thicker than ordinary clap, which sticks in patches on the linen, and between the nut and foreskin of the penis. Under the microscope this discharge is found to consist of spermatozoa, frequently in a mutilated state, and free from vitality. The affection is characterized by the emission of semen upon the very first attempt at sexual intercourse, a7id often lefore a regular erectioji can tahe place; sitting in a warm room, horse exercise, and many trivial causes will produce it. The emission causes little or no sensation, excepting sometimes a slight spasm. These discharges are not contagious, but sexual intercourse should be studiously avoided on account of the great injury that may result to the patient. Such discharges are generally connected with deficiency of generative power.



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION". 97

In one instance under our notice, impotence was almost complete ; in another (a married professional man), the powers had greatly declined. These patients were in the prime of life; both had, however, led irregular lives. The irritation in cases of this nature will generally be found to exist in the prostate gland, which is often enlarged ; hence a frequent desire to urinate, and a feeling as if the bladder were never completely emptied, and as though a few drops of urine were retained in the posterior part of the urethra. This form of discharge is generally confounded with a common contagious clap, and treated vigorously mth copaiva, cubebs, and injections. A cure by these means is utterly impossible ; the disease IS increased, as the general health suffers from the remedies. It is, however, quite true that these patients have previously sulfered from gonorrhffia, in some instances more than once. But m order to cure, we must purify the blood and strengthen the parts. The subject, altogether, IS well worthy the careful attention of the profession, for these cases are decidedly on the increase.



LECTURE VI.

VENEREAL DISEASE—HISTORY.

Had the disease, since known by the name of Venereal, been a familiar one, possessing no features different from those already recognized as characterizing affections of the genital organs, and yielding to an already ascertained treatment, we natnrally should expect that tlie authors who might notice it Avould never have thought of designing it as new and unknown ; neither w^ould they have expressed terror at encountering it, nor expressed their entire ignorance as to the means of cure. Sucli. however, we find to be the fact, from universal testimony of the writers of the age. The appearance, indeed, of this new form of disease was an event so important that mention of it was made, not only by physicians, but the historians living at the period also record the circumstance. ^ We will cite the authority of Gonzalo Hernandez de Oveido, and refer our readers to his curious volume, in black letter, in the library of the British Museum. The date is 1526, ''Sumario dc la Natural Hystorui



NEKVOUS EXHAUSTION.

99

de las Indias and Oveido distinctly states tlio American origin of venereal, and the inability of the physicians to cure it. Another historian of the period, Lopez de Clomera, writes, "Because it was a new disease no one knew what to do." Other contemporary writers, Paul Jovius Guicciardiui, &c., express themselves to the same effect. Most of the early writers attribute the disease to God's anger ; some to conjunction of the planets; others, of more matter-of-fact views, were disposed to ascribe its origin to another kind of conjunction, of not so celestial a nature; for there are authors of this date who distinctly notice the primary sores or chancres, and trace them to their real origin— contagion by impure intercourse ; they mention strong salivation by mercury as a cure. Joseph Greenbank, who describes his OAvn case, in a work Avritten with much purity of Latinity for the age, attributes the cause to planetary influence, lie Avished to keep it secret from his friends, but they found him out "from the change in his complexion and no sooner was it known (and the fact shows in Avhat terror the disease was held), than " his dearest friends and relations fled his presence, as they would an enemy with a drawn sword." The notion



NEEVOUS KXUAUSTION.

prevailed that it could be caught by merely breathing the same air with the infected pei--son ; hence the lower orders Avere driven into the woods and fields, and left to perish wiili-out solace or assistance. It formed one of tlie charges against Cardinal Wolsey, that " whe-n laboring under venereal he had breathed upon the king in whispering to him."' Hence, being looked upon as a contagious disease to whicli any one was liable, the physicians of the age did not scruple to publish the cases of princes— and even churchmen—who had the disease ; and most of the medical works on the subject are dedicated either to princes or dignitaries of the Church. Another opinion was very prevalent —even now the belief is not yet extinct—that any one having the disease, by transmitting it to "another relieved himself; though it was asserted that, to make the experiment successful, it was necessary that the person to wliom the infection was to be transferred should never before have had sexual intercourse. It is scarcely necessary to add that this atrocious niul ridiculous belief gave rise to most disgrace fill outrages. The manner in which the new disoase ran its devastating course, spreading in distant countries with a rapidity which, joined



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

101

to a complete ignorance of treatment, truly appalled mankind, must be acknowledged to constitute a proof of its newness—and universal testimony leaves no doubt on that score. That it was first brouglit from the island of St. Domingo, then called Hispaniola, by the followers of Columbus, there is abundant and satisfactory proof. Few of the Spaniards escaped who had connection with the native woman, and the ships of Columbus proceeding to different ports, the disease spread over Europe with wonderons rapidity. In 1526, Joseph Grunback informs us that oji returning from his travels, he found disease prevailing all over Germany—in every town, city, camp, village, and cottage—as well as the greater part of Europe."' In the same year we are told by Sebastian Brant that it had got to Britain ; and in 149:, James IV. of Scotland, in consequence of tlie frightful prevalence of venereal in Edinburgh, issued tlie celebrated proclamation banishing the infected from the city. The original is preserved in the records of the town council, dated September 22d, im, and is a very curious document. His " Majesty charges all man-ner of persons being within the freedom of this burt, quilks are infectit, or has been infectit,



KERNOUf) KXIIAUSTIOX.

imcurit with this said contagious plague, called the Grandgor, devoyd, red, and pass fnrt of this toun, and compeir upon the sandis of Leith, at ten hours before none,"—those evading this ordinance "selle be brynt on the cheik with the marking irne, that they may be kennit in tyme to cum."

We may also cite here the more generally known " Arreste" of the Parliament of Paris, respecting the venereal, dated March 6th, 1490, stating that "Because in thys City of Paris many persons were sick of a certain disease called the ' Great Pocks,' which had raged in this kingdom/or//ic last t wo years, as well in Paris as in other parts of France and as there was reason to apprehend that it would increase as the spring advanced, it was advised to provide accordingly. Thus all strangers having the disease Avere to leave in twenty-four hours, and forbidden to enter the city until perfectly cured. The 2d article ordained, " That every citizen being diseased conlined himself to his house." No communication was allowed between the sick and the inhabitants, under penalty of imprisonment ; and the city gates were carefully watched. The general prevalence of the disease can only be accounted for by the



NERVOUS EXHAUSTIOK". ' 103

undoubted licentiousness of the age—as we liave no reason for believing that then, any more than at present, could it bo propagated except by actual contact of the venereal matter. We have enlarged on this subject rather more than we intended, in ©rdcr to prove the great difficulty exjierienced from the earliest' period in eradicating this disease. We have studied the subject closely—Ave have reviewed the mode of treatment from the earliest period up to the present time, and we most unhesitatingly and emphatically declare that we have reduced the treatment to a certainty; that we possess the means of eradicating the venereal virus from the constitution without the smallest inconvenience to the patient, and that no case leaves our charge without a thorough and perfect cure being effected ; that we prevent the possibility of secondary symptoms, and the numerous skin diseases to Avhich it gives rise ; and, lastly, our treatment applies to all who have taken mercury, or have been improperly treated by others.

DISEASES OF INFECTION—GONORRHCEA OR OLAP.

Gonorrhea may be defined to be a contagious inflammatory disease of the mucous membrane of the urethra or urinary canal, caused by



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

impure sexual connection. It sometimes appears tlie first or second day, but the usual average is from seven to eight days after intercourse. On the otlier hand, it is sometimes delayed for tAvo, thi-ee, or even four weeks. At first, the patient feels an itching at the tip of the ureflira, the lips of Avhich appear swollen and of a deep rod; this is followed hy a discharge of matter and great pain and scalding in making water. In all cases of gonorrhoea, advice should he obtained as early as possible : early attention insures a speedy cure ; and it may be laid down as a general rule, that the longer the disease is allowed full scope, the more dififtcult and obstinate is its removal. Where there is much inflammation, the bowels should be kept open with the following ai>erient draught:—

R: Magnes. sulphatis, unciam j.

Infus. senna? comp., une. vss.

Ext. glycyrrh., scrnp. ij.

Tinct. jalapi, drachin. iij.

HyiL ammon. aromat., drachmam j. Mis. Fiat mist. ai)erient. Cap. l-i partem pro re nata.



NEIvVOL S EXHAUSTION.

105.

Th;it is, take of— Epsom salts, 1 oz.

Componnd infusion of senna, 5 ^ oz. Extract of liquorice, 2 scruples. Tincture cf jalap, 3 drachms. Spirit of aromatic ammonia, 1 drachm. Mix, and take one-fourth part as occasion requires.

A cooling lotion may also be useful. ApjDly the following two or three times a day :—

R. Miu'iat. amnion., drachmam j.

Liq. plumbi diacet, drach. ij.

Spt. vini rect., unciam j.

Aq. font., unc. v. Mis. Fiat lofcio.

That is, take of—

Muriate of ammonia, 1 drachm. Liquor of lead, 2 drachms. Rectified spirits of Avine, 1 oz. Dilute acetic acid, 1 oz. Spring Avater, 5 oz. Mix for a lotion.

[The bottle should be carefully labelled, ''The Lotion.'-]



NEKVOUS EXHAUSTION.

During the progress of gonorrha?a, attention to cleanliness cannot be too strongly recommended. A warm bath should be taken occasionally, and the penis should be bathed as frequently as possible in warm -water, or milk imd water, to destroy the acrimony of the discharge, and to prevent its irritating action on the skin. Great comfort Avill be experienced by the patient suspending the testicles in a small bag so as to support them while walking, &c. This simple precaution frerpieutly prevents swelled testicles, one of the most painful effects of gonorrhoea. The diet should be carefully regulated in the early inflammatory stage; the food should be light, but nutritious, and not highly seasoned. AVines, spirits, and malt' liquors should be a\ oided ; the patient may drink freely of thin linseed tea, or barley-water. The following may also be grateful:—Cream of tartar, one oz.; boiling Avater, two ((uarts; st rain, and sweeten Avith lumji sugar, according lo taste. AVe frecjucntly cure slight cases ofgon-orrhooa in four-and-twenty hours ; others in three days; and, with common attention on the i)art of the patient, and observance of the ahove siinple rules, our average of severe attacks is from six to eight days.



KEUVOFS EXHAU8TI0K.

GLEET,

In which the discharge loses its irritable malignity, is of alarming consequence in its duration. It cannot be too freciuently asserted that gk-et is higlily c(mtagious, and produces a gonorrhoea as siJeedily and as certainly as the more inflammatory disease. Gleet will remain chronic for weeks, months, or even years, and vary in intensity according io changes in diet, &c.; so much so, indeed, that well-informed medical men have mistaken it for a fresh contagion of gonorrhea, and by ti-eating it accordingly have caused much misery to the luckless patient. In these cases microscopic observation is of essential importance ; by its moans the true cause of disease is at once detected, and its extent clearly delined. (ileet and scuiinal weakness, gonorrhoea and seminal Aveakness, arising from sclf-pollution,are fref[uently co-existent, tbough not necessarily connected. When they do exist together, the disease assumes a most obstinate form. The value of the microscope is that it proves, Avith certainty, if spermatozoa, or the seminal fluid, be present in the discharge or in the urine. The treatment mvitt vary arrordingly. A new and unsuspected feature is introduced,



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

whicli baffles the routine adopted by the gcnero2 practitioner. Hence the importance of a special and careful study of these diseases. In cases of mismanagement or carelessness, and sometimes by suddenly stopping the discharge by means of astringent injections, an active inflammation of the testicles may occur, accompanied Avith much pain and swelling. Tlie following case occurred in our practice a few months ago :—A gentleman, who had just returned from a continental tour, consulted us. Three years before he had contracted gonorrhoea, which terminated in gleet; ho had been under the care of several gentlemen, the last a practitioner at Berlin, who prescribed an injection, which brought on swelled testicles ; besides Avhich he suffered from a stricture. The immediate pain and swelling had been relieved by the repeated application of leeches, but the smallest exposure to cold or dani]) lirought on a return. The testicles felt hard, and there was not the slightest inclination for sexual intercourse. We caused, by our remedies, a very considerable discharge from, the penis, which we encouraged as inuch as possilde. This soon removed the liardncss of the testicles,



NUKVOUS EXHAUSTIOK".

109

and reduced them to their natural size. The gentleuuin was perfectly cured in ten weeks.

STMCTUKE

Is generally caused by a long-continued gleet, though there are cases in which it is produced by Onaiiism. Tlie tlrst symptoms of a stricture are a slight difficulty in ihe act of urinating, and a division or twisting of the stream of water. In all cases, however slight, apply immediately for medical assistance. Stricture never yields nuassisfed hy art. Much suffering nuiy be avoided by ol)serving this rule.

SYPHILIS, OK rox.

Is the. most dangerous and maligmmt of all forms of venereal disease. It hangs aljout the system for years, producing secondary and tertiary symptoms, intense pains in the back and loins, ulcerated sore throat, &c. In syphilis we have a virulent blood-poison, through which every tissue is affected. Indeed, the ooraplica-ted mischief arising from this malady is known only to him wlio has an opportunity of seeing it in every shape and form under which it appears. The syphilitic disease kills great numbers in the prime of life, destroys the comfort





NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

of the matrimonial bed, and transmits morbid predispositions to declining years. To eonceal their imprudence the inexperienced pei-mit themselves to be surcharged Avith mercury, which, in this varialjle climate, is liable to induce the most fatal inflammations and pulmonary diseases, to which they ultimately fall victims, without creating m their families the slightest suspicion of'ih.e real cause of their death. A most important feature in the historv of syphilitic diseases is the' fact of their transmission from the parents to the offspring. Dr. Burns, in his work on " MidAvifery," observes that infection may happen when neither of the parents has at any time any venereal swelling or ulceration, and perhaps many years after a cure has been (q^jmrenfly effected. I do not intend to explain Jiere tlie tlieory of syphiiis, but content myself with well-established facts." In these cases miscarriages frequently occur without evident cause ; or should the child be born alive, it is covered M'ith copper-colored spots on various parts of the Itodv ; the eyes arc inflamed, and there is a mucous discharge fi-om the nostrils. Should it unfortunately survive infancy, it Avill only be to fall a prey to scrofula or consumption at a later period. JJr.



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION. HI

Hunter records ii case of a couple who hud been married twelve years, during which neither party was diseased, nor had been unfaithful. The husband had syphilis two years before marriage, but considered himself cured. The two first children were healthy ; the next two feeble, and soon died ; the last child was put out to nurse, and having a sore mouth, soon affected the nurse Avith sore nipples,and blotches resembling syphilitic sores. Dr. Hunter treated both husband and wife for secondary symptoms; the lady, who had been weakly for years, was soon restored to vigorous health; and three children, who were subsequently born, remained perfectly well. The local sores produced by syphilis are term chancres : they are sometimes single; sometimes two, three, or four are pre-senT;." The chancre generally makes its appearance four or five days after the impure intercourse ; but, as in gonorrha?a, the time varies from one day to thirty. A small inflamed s})ot is first perceived, the scab drops off, and a larger one is formed beneath, which rapidly enlarges. An excavation appears in the centre, the skin in the neighborhood is indurated and thickened, the hard base being characteristic of syphilitic sores. After some time, and even



NERVOUS EXHAI'STIOX.

when the original spot i.s liealed, t]ie groin (one or hoth) hccomcs affected ; tliey suppurate and burst, forming Avhat are called buboes. The throat, the noi^e, tne skin, the lones, are successively attacked, and if neglected or maltreated, death may and does frequently ensue. Syphilis, perhaps, may not be regarded as a directly faf-al disease, altliougli its effects are so deplorable, especially in bad constitutions. It J8 indirectly that this disease is so very destructive to life by poisoniug and debilitating the frame, a-nd tlius exposing it to innumerable forms of disease. In questioning patients in hospitals aiid dispensaries as to their previous history, how often is it found that venereal disease is the first link of the cluiin which is dragging them to the grave ! Sypliilis was firft recognized in Paris, in 1497 ; for along time no hospit:ils would receive patients, and tlic poorer classes of them Avei-e driven to the woods and fields, and left to die without comfort or assistance, even by medical men. Some years after, the mercurial treatment was adopted, which, with fcM' exceptions, is used at the lircsent day. Now, it may be confidentially asserted that as much misery has been and is caused by the use of mercury as by the disease



NEETOUS EXHAUSTION.

113

itself. AVitness fclie rotten skulls and diseased bones exhibited in our anatomical collections ! Let us again urge all jiatients suffering from syphilis in any of its forms to apply at once to a qualified and experienced medical man. \¥e have seen so much misery, loss of health, loss of every enjoyment which renders life a blessing, resulting from this disease, and from its improper treatment by mercury, that we will not countenance, even indirectly, any attempt at self-cure.

SECOXDAKY SYMPTOMS, EFFECTS OF MERCURY,&C.

Some weeks after a chancre is apparently healed, especially after the use of mercury in any of its forms, a slight redness is perceived ea the scar, which becomes rather painful; or a swelling appears in the g]-oin. A general sense of. discomfort is experienced, and in a short time the well-marked secondary symptoms oeoir. When the poison attacks the throat or palate, the roof of the mouth becomes red and inflamed; a small pimple is formed, which ulcerates and exposes the bony palate. If allowed to pass unchecked, the bone exfoliates, a eonnection is formed between the mouth and nose, the voice is most unpleasantly changed,



NEliVOUS EXHAUSTION.

and an offensive discharge secreted. When the tonsils are affected, ulcers appear similar in appearance to chancres. The soreness of the throat is not at first very severe ; tliere is merely a slight tickling sensation when a crust or a.ny dry food is SAvallowed. But this, if unchecked, is one of the most severe forms of syphilis. The larynx is next attacked, on the top of the windpipe, and if not arrested will soon destroy life. Eruptions of the face and skin are one of the most comn^on scquch'a of s.yphilis treated mercurially. They make the skin thick, r(3ugh, and unecpud ; the countenance accpiires a livid hue ; the spots are generally of a reddish, brownish, or copper color, and appear and disappear repeatedly. The following letter will illustrate the variotis eifects of secondaiy symptoms :—

" Albany, N. Y., March JS. '^DEAii SiH—I am truly happy to inform you that all traces of that insidious disease Avitli whicli I Avas so long afflicted luive left me. I am noAY (piite Avcll ; ,s/iiii quilc clear from spo/s, throat entirely healed, ami i<]iiii hones strong ami entlrehj free from ftwclliiiffs. After being under so m;iny medical men, I did not



KERVOtTS EXlrAUSTlOK.

115

think it possible you could have cured me so quickly. All I can do is to thank you. You may piTblish the case if you think proper, so that all may be benefited.

I am, sir, yours faithfully and obliged,

D. M."

This gentleman was sutfering from a complicated case of secondary symptoms; he had been salivated three times, and consequently his system was saturated with mercury. Our first object was to eliminate the mineral ; second, to strengthen and invigorate the constitution. The case occupied a period of nearly nine weeks.



LECTURE VII.

CERTAISr MEA2srS BY WHICH A COHRECT KifOWL-EDGE OF THE PATIEKT's CASE MAY BE OBTAINED.

The only certain means we can adoj^t for obtaining a knowledge of the Patient's case is by testing the urine with our Xewl y-Co2s^structed Microscope, with powerful Lexses. TTe are thus able to discover two most important points, by Avhich our treatment is greatly influenced. Firstly, we can ascertain whether the urine contains a portion of tlie seed —that is to say, Avhether in urinating there is a constant loss of the seminal fluid. Secondly, and of even greater importance, Avhether the ani-.malr.nlm or spermatozoa, of w"hich the seminal fluid is principally composed, be endued with that vitality wifliout wliich tl/e semen, is vnfitlcd to 2)crform its f unctions. In short, the microscope enables us to ascertain whether the seed he alive or dead. It need scarcely be observed, that when the seed is deficient in vitality the virile functions are greatly impaired, and the man soon becomes impotent as well as sterile.



NERVOUS EXttAtJSTiO^r.

111^

With tlie aid of our microscoj^c we can unerringly ascertain Avliether a discharge be from the prostate gland, from the seminal vessels, or from impure connection; and many cases which have been improperly treated, as gonorrhoea, for months, avc have thus been enabled to cure in a week or ten days. It is our practice to request patients in the country to send a small quantity of their urine for examination by means of the microscope. Any patient consulting us by letter will, therefore, enclose a two-ounce flat bottle, containing the urine passed on rising in the morning, securely corked and sealed, packed carefully in wool to prevent breaking, in a seidlit;? box, Avhich, with the flat bottle, maybe obtained at any druggist's. The parcel may be addressed, carriage paid. Dr. L. J. Kahn,

51 East 10th Street, Xew York.

The patient is requested to be as minute as possible in the details of his case. Dr. Kahn has also made arrangements by which his medicines can be forwarded, safely packed and free fx-om observation, to any part of tlie Avorld.



LECTURE VIII.

ON SKIN DISEASES.

Dr. Kahn has invited tlie attention of the public and of the profession to his important discoveries in the treatment of skin diseases ; and, although he cannot complain that his 'vieAvs have been neglected, still the subject is one of so great importance as to require no apolog}^ for enlarging upon it. We all know that for many years the remedies generally relied on in these cases were arsenic, mercury (corrosive sublimate), antimony, and caustic ; that medical men looked upon skin diseases in general (as too many, indeed, continue to do) as something to be hammered at, without much hope of relief, with all tlie most deadly drugs of the Pharmacopoeia. The almost invariable result Avas, and is, that even if the disease is cured, which is exceedingly doubtful, the constitution is ruined for the remained of the life. Let any man take up a medical work on skin diseases, and he Avill find, even now, that arsenic is looked on as the sheet anchor, and that hundreds of cases are reported in which arsenic Bucceedcd in cnritig afior all olhor IronlmonI





NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

119

had failed. Now, I have carefully, and for years, watched the results produced by this plan of treatment. I have always found it injurions. In many cases, after a time, there is a return of disease worse than before, and almost invariably, cure or no cure, I have found serious organic mischief a^ectmg the heart or the lungs. I am here simply stating results—results which I have met with daily in a most extensive practice. It is scarcely worth while to enter into causes ; for it is quite in accordance with common sense that we should expect deadly poisons to produce deadly results. Why these particular organs should be so affected is certainly of interest to medical men. Few diseases have been more minutely classified and described than the various forms of skin diseases, and it would be easy to enumerate fifty or sixty Latin and Greek names which have been ap})lied to them ; but I fear the information would not be interesting to the general reader. For myself, I am in the habit of applying one general principle of treatment in all the varied forms which I see daily. My principle is simple enough and general enough to take rank as a great discovery. It is a principle I have acted upon in practice and have advocated in public for years,



KERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

and certiiinl)' my success lias Ijcen most extraordinary. I Avill explain it in a few words. Let ALOi^E TRE 8kin Disease—Pt-riey the Blood.

Instead of classifying skin disease under ten. twenty, fifty, or a hundred heads, I find, as a general rule, they take rank under thi-ec, and that treatment must vary according to diagnosis—still acting on the golden rule, purify the blood." Skin diseases are:—

1st.—Hereditary.

2d.—Of syphilitic origin.

^d.—Accidental, occasional,and anomalous. Hekeditart Skin Diseases are, undoubtedly, difficult to cure. The impure blood of the parent descends to the children. The result is an intractable form of disease, and the only hope of cure is in steady, persevering treatment. Every globule of the blood is vitiated fi-oni the very cradle ; and if the smallest trace of the impurity is allowed to remain in the system, all the labor is in vain, for the patient in a short time will be as bad as ever again. Hereditary skin disease is frequently consumption or scrofula in a rather milder form. There is no doubt in my mind of the intimate connection between these forms of



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION-. . 131

disease. It is obvious that all local remedies must be of uecessity ridiculous, and oven dangerous. In fact, the best dressing, where there is great irritation, is a little cold or lukewarm water on lint. Above all, avoid greasy applications or caustics. In this, as in other forms of skin disease, I am frequently consulted by those who have taken sarsaparilla for months or for years in large quantities, and desire my opinion as to the benefit to be derived from its use. My experience is that sarsaparilla in itself is practically inert in cold or in temperate climates. But it is perfectly wholesome and harmless ; it is a pleasant drink, and a decidedly nice vehicle for the administration of certain drugs. On the other hand, in tropical climates, or during exceptionally hot weather (as all through the summer of last year), sarsaparilla exerts a slight action upon the skin Avhich is decidedly cooling and beneficial. In all forms of skin disease I attach considerable importance to the use of the bath ; not that the theory of the water-doctors will satisfy—but I am willing to accept truth even from opponents; and certainly their plan approaches more nearly to the correct principle than the wholesale administration of poisonous minerals. I may add



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

that, applying tlio same remedies, I have been signally successful in my treatment of scrofula and consumption. Skin diseases of syphilitic ORIGIN I have named as another great class of disease ; and certainly their importance entitles them to a rank apart. It is unnecessary in this part of the work to allude more particularly to their origin. Nor do I intend to include what we may more properly class as '•Secondary Symptoms." In cases of disease of the true syphilitic type there is always danger that secondary and tertiary symptoms may ensue, especially when the patient is improperly treated and salivated by the imprudent administration of mercury. But these cases are sufficiently obvious, and any mistake in their diagnosis is not probable, whatever there may be in their treatment. I make this observation because it unfortunately happens that in these, as in the primary disease, it is far too mucli the fashion to prescribe mercury. But skin diseases of syphilitic origin may occur many years after the original disease, and when, in fact, till' cause is unthought of ami forgotten. They are Ijrought on by a taint, virus-poison, or germ, ])rodnced by the original disease, and which has reniiiineil dormant in the blood for months or



NEKVOUS EXHAUSTION.

133

for years. I cannot tell you the reason of this extraordinary phenomenon: I can only tell you the fact. But it is easy to give an illustration of the unexplainable effects produced by animal poisons. A man is bitten by a dog, perhaps so slightly as just to draAV blood. The wound heals in a day or two, and the circumstance is entirely forgotten. But three months, six months, or (cases are recorded) even twelve months afterwards, he is seized Avith hydrophobia, and death in a day or two is certain. So with syphilis: the poison may remain dormant for months or for years, and then, break-ine out, cause skin diseases of the most serious and intractable character. It is here important to remark, that it does not necessarily folloAV because a patient has suffered previously from syphilis, and is afterwards affected by skin disease, that the disease is of syphilitic origin. I have been consulted by numerous patients, whose lives have been rendered miserable by groundless fears, and have found, on careful examination, no trace Avhatever of syphilitic taint. IIoAv is it possible to discover ? may be asked; and my reply is, by one means and by one means only—and that is, careful chemical and microscopical examination and analysis ol



NERVOUS EXHAUSTIOiJ.

tlie iiriiie. My trentment of skin diseases of syphilitic origin is precisely the same in principle as of skin diseases generally. It is necessary to bear in mind that the blood is affected by a specific poison or virus, which must be neutralized. Pukify the blood, and the work is done. Accidental, Occasional, Anomalous skin diseases are such as arise without a])-parejit cause; or they may result from errors of diet, hard living, exposure to the weather. I have frequently seen them as the result of bad provisions, impure water, &c., during a prolonged voyage. Salt food is injurious to some constitutions. To write at length on the various forms of disease which may be classed under the head anomalous would exhaust far more space than I have at command. It is obvious that in their treatment, even more than in other foi-ms of the disease, my dogma is the only one consistent with common sense, truth and reason ; and even at the expense of being considered prolix, I must again repeat, purify the blood.

DR. KAHN's JiUOOD-PUKIFYIXG TREATMENT

Has now been used by the discoverer for a long series of years. Its action is ])urely upon the

4



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

125

blood, wliicli it vitalizes, enriches, cleanses, iuid thoroughly purifies. The consequence is, that it is absolutely specific in all cases of skin disease, no matter from what cause arising. That this is so isiproved by the undoubted testimony of thousands who have used it with unfailing effect during the last ten years. To prevent any possibility of disapi)ointment. Dr. Kahn Avishes it to be distinctly understood that it is necessary to continue treatment for a certain length of time. Skin diseases are in their nature intractable and diflicult to cure ; and to promise a rapid and permanent cure with a single bottle of medicine would be to bring discredit upon it, however valuable. But the improvement will be found to be immediate, and no matter how serious or of how longstanding, the disease is certain to yield to a proper course of the system, which is destined to elfect a revolution in the medical treatment of these cases, and is In truth the most important discovery in medical science since the introduction of vaccination by Dr. Jenner.

Many persons, Avho have imagined themselves cured of the venereal disease, have had the misfortune to find the disease break out again six or seven years afterwards. A proof of this



NEKVOUS EXHAL'STIO-X.

happened in our practice lately. A gentleman was afflicted with the complaint, and wa.scui'cd, as he thought, by the advice and prescriptions of an eminent surgeon. He afterwards married: II few months after which he caught a sevei-e cold, which terminated in a sore throat. He applied to a medical man, who prescribed the usual remedies, but entirely without success. Having been advised to consult us, he called upon us, and after a careful investigation, we informed him it proceeded from an old venereal complaint. It was some time before he would admit this to be the fact, and he persevered with the old remedies nearly a month longer, till at length the disease became so serious thct he was compelled to place himself under our care ; the rapid improvement under our treatment was sufficient proof of the truth of our diagnosis. We therefore recommend extreme care that the disease be thoroughly eradicated from the blood ; for this purpose our medicines are very generally employed, and will be found most valuable, particularly in tlic after consequences, in removing all corrupt ions, contaminations, and impurities from the vital stream, searching out ilie morbid virvs, a/id radic(dly expdliug it llirourjh flic ski7i.



APPENDIX.

EX TABULIS ^TSOROTORUM MEIS.

(Selecfions from my Case-Booh.)

In adding these cases, I may be permitted to observe that they are selected, not becansethey are the Avorst Avliicli liave come nnder my observation and treatment, but as being interesting to tlie general reader, and as containing some point likely to be nseful as an exam])le. These cases are correct in every particular, they are true to nature, and are a fair sample of those which I am, and have been for years, in the daily habit of meeting with in my extensive practice. That my success in trea,tment has been so uniform, I atti'ibute (under Providence) to my extreme care in diagnosis, and to my use of purely natural remedies, eschewing those dangerous mineral poisons so entirely depended on by the general pi'actitioner. It is not my intention to add to these cases in future editions of this work. Invfolable secreoy is the rule of my practice, and may always be relied on. I have uever yet published a case, excepting with





NERVOUS EXHAUSTION'.

the express permission of tlie patient, and fre-qnently at his request ; and the initials employed are arbitrary.

IMPORTANT NOTICE.

Patients are informed that no case is published in this Avork without tlie "written' cox-sent, AND GENERALLY AT THE REQUEST, of the

individual referred to ; and the most intio-lable secrecy may be faithfully relied on in all communications.

Case 1,787.

" New Orleans. " Sir —A perusal of your excellent work has induced me to hope you Avill be able to render me some assistance ; I accordingl}' feel the greatest confidence in submitting the following case for yowx opinion and advice. I am twenty-four years of age. At the age of fifteen I was induced to indulge in the habit of self-abuse, which I practised unremittingly once or twice a day for six years. Thougli I have entirely given up the practice for the last two years, I am, however, suffering from its cruel effects.



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

129

During the time above lueiitioned I led an extremely regular life, never drank much spirituous liquor, nor had I intercourse with females. In fact, so timid was I that I had not courage enough to address a Avoman on the suliject. I was remarkably short and slender; and every morning when I awoke, a yellowish matter Avhich had issued from my month during tlie night stained the pillow. I constantly complained of determination of blood to the head and of great nervousness. My sight and memory began to fail me. I felt pain over the abdomen after each act, but was still ignorant of the enormity of the vice and of its dii-e effects. In tlie spring of 1807, whilst at cliurcli, I had a rush of blood to the head, and fainted. I was brought home and had leeches applied to the back. The medical attendant hinted at the practi ce of self-pollution as the cause of the affection. This opened my eyes to the truth, though I concealed it. My sufferings, mental and bodily, now became dreadful. My intel-, leotnal faculties became entirely confused. I now became a mere skeleton. My eyes were quite dead, and bluish streaks were perceptible below my eyelids. I constantly staggered in walking, and frequently was near falling. I



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

had constant dizziness in the head, and a host of symptoms, principally from the head, for which no one conld account. From shame, I did not reveal my condition till, being affected with a pain in the chest, I consulted a medical man, and was somewhat relieved. My accumulated sufferings now brought on a profound melancholy. Travelling being now recommended, I came up to Xew York, where change of scene and plenty of exercise have worked a great improvement in my condition ; still, however, I have severe sufferings, which I beg leave to enumerate to you. I have involuntary emissions of semen both when asleep and when awake, in the company of females or before a fire. I am affected with constant dizziness in the head. My sense of hearing as well as that of sight is impaired—a sort of mist before my eyes—a kind of undulating pain in the chest. I am entirely incapacitated for sexual intercourse. A constant feeling of terror is constantly hanging over me. Such is as accurate an account as I can give of my present and former state ; may I therefore solicit your immediate reply to my distressing case ?

" I am, &c., &c.,

"W. Vx. T."



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

131

Kemakks. —If ever a subject presented himself for exemjilifying all the dire effects of self-abuse, it was this individual. The order, too, in which the disastrous consequences of this habit were observed to follow each other, is very remarkable, and in perfect accordance with the pathological princijiles adyanced in the previous jDart of this work ; in fact, this one case would serve as an illustration of all we have said on the subject. First, the patient was observed to be remarkably short and slender. Here we sec how the practice of self-pollution, by disturbing and destroying in the first instance the functions of digestion, impaired the growth and nutrition of the body. The next ravages committed by it Avere on the nervous system, and first on the hrain; the sense of vision being impaired was a consequence of this ; the disturbance of the nervous system was also evinced by the determination of blood to this organ. The failure of memory, too, and of all the intellectual faculties, the state of melancholy, so perceptible in this case, arc further proofs of the destructive influence of this habit. Nor was the brain the only part of the nervous centres affected : the spinal system also became deeply implicated, as proved



NERVOUS EXTIAUSTION.

by the wandering pains in the chest and over the abdomen ; the staggering gait of the patient, the state of muscular debility into which he was thrown, the involuntary seminal discharges, the total inability of the patient to perform the generative act, are still further instances of the melancholy effects of the habit of masturbation.

After impressing on this patient the absolute necessity of abandoning this habit, which, according to his own account he had himself done, we undertook the treatment of the case ; and by prescribing such medicinal and dietetic rules as the complicated nature of the patient's condition seemed to require, we succeeded, in about two months in restoring the patient to the enjoyment of perfect health.

Cask 1.015. Rangoox, January ^Oth, 1868. SiK—1 find myself constrained to fly to you at last, and reveal a secret which I c;in no longer keep to myself. You will readily understand what it is, although I arn filled with shame and confusion to acknowledge it even to you. But I feel assured thro-^^ng myself into your hands



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

iilone will save me, aiul render me liappy as a man in this world.

I am one of those uidiappy beings who early fell a victim to that i^ernicions an ! accursed habit, self-]iollution, which has already rendeiX'd me imjjotent, and it will not be long, perhaps, before its symptoms exhibit themselves in all their severity upon me. Would to God tliat 1 had never known this soul-destroying crime. How happy had I been if, even after knowing it, I had that moral restraint upon myself to check it, as a rational being and a Christian ought to do. I was let into knowledge of this forbidden habit (I curse the day it was) at sucli an eai'ly age as fourteen. I am now entering upon twenty-four, and it will be as superfluous as unnecessary for me to tell you to what state these nearly ten years' indulgence in this nefarious act must have reduced me. You can divme that yourself better than I can describe.

Your little work, Avhich fell into my hands, . providentially I think, soon convinced me of my imin-udence, and awakened me to a true sense of my position, and made me look, as if with a new eye, upon the blackness of this vice, wliich I have at last given up, I hope forever.



NKKVOL S EXHAU«TIOX.

The long i-ontinnuncG, however, played fill the mischief imaginable upon me. My health visibly gave way to it. My memory fails me, and is no faithful companion of mine to trust. My mind is daily sinking into a state of stupe, faction, and is unwilling or unable to exert itself, and my strength is so prostrate that I feel an utter aversion to all bodily exercise.

Yet to all outward appearance I look hearty and strong, being corpulent; and none, I think, Avould suspect me as addicted to this vice, unless, indeed, a keen observer discover it, if that be possible, in my eyes, which look vague and dull. It appears to me strange that, unlike many who were subject to this vitiating habit, I have ample hair about my face, thick moustaches coming on my upper lip, and have ample and thick whiskers ; I feel no particular pain about back or loins Avorth mentioning. My bowels are generally costive, testicles pendulous, and penis rather short than of ordinary length. I get emissions at night, on an average of perhaps once a month.

These, sir, as I describe 1o you, are the symptoms as appear to me. I do not know by what wonderful providence I am still kept to look like a nuin, although wKliout the essence or



NERVOUS EXHAUSTIOX.

135

attribute. I can only fly to you at this extremity, and look upon you, next to tlie Almighty, as one who alone can restore and give back to me all that I have brutally and igiiorantly lost. I have not been in circumstances till now to apply to you for help and cure ; and what I can at present afford I send you for your priceless and invaluable remedies, the taking of which only could, I am confident, make me whole and renew }ny happiness.

Give, sir, I beseech you, such attention to the case of one who throws himself into your hands as the severity of this disorder merits, and avIio will consider and respect you next to his God for the cure Avhich cannot be got elsewhere in the world but in your hands. Please l)e good enough to see the medicines you send me well packed, so that the rough usage they will meet with may not damage them. It will be also esteemed a favor, your letting me know your opinion. All your instructions will be thankfully and gratefully obeyed. Awaiting your reply with greatest anxiety, I beg to remain sir, your obedient servant.

Please address me thus: To Mr. . care

of , Rangoon, Burmah.



NERVOUS EXHAUSTIOlf.

Remarks. —This gentleman required active traatment for a period of four months. ITe was thoroughly and effectnally cured, and has since returned to the United States and married. A fcAV months since I received a letter announcing that his wife had l)een safelv delivered of a fine hoy.

Case 3,7G5.

Sax Francisco. A clergyman, ahout thirty years of age, consulted me not long ago in reference to generative deUlity, arising from hahits, the ultimate results of Avhich Avcre unforeseen, hif noir sufficient to emhitter cristenrc. Ahout tliree months previously to the date of liis first application to me, he married, and much to liis surprise and mortification, had heen unalile to consummate the ends of that institution, in cnnseqnence of premature and invniuniarii emission invariahly preceding the atteuipt. and thus destroying sexual power. After wailing a few weeks, he liecanie ]iainfully convinced that without interference tliis state would become permanent ; and in his intercourse with me I elicited the fact that, when a schoolboy, he was initiated bvsonnMif liis precctcious fclh'\v-pu]uls



IfEliVOL'S EXHAUSTION.

into the lijibit of sell-pollution. This, indeed, became truly a habit, from which lie dreaded no ill consequences, excepting from its too frequent repetition, and generally twice a week by manual friction he was accustomed to seek that relief for Avhich the sexual propensity is the natural outlet. lie told me that he never feared the loss of poMer, though occasionally haunted by iU-dpJiiied nervous indigestioii, the true cause of which never occurred to his thoughts, and the absence of all apprehension arose from the supposed consciousness that he never lashed these organs to efforts for Avhich they did not appear perfectly prone and capable. IS'oAv, however, the tendency of this injurious habit flashed upon his conviction in all its terrible reality. It appears that during ten years previously to his marriage he had been the subject of nocturnal eiiiif<sio)is occurring irregularly, but generally once in every Aveek or ten days ; but to this he was accustomed to attach not the slightest importance, under the idea that the discharge was perfectly natural, and in no way connected with the habit of his boyhood. The consciousness of his imi)otence, and the perception of its cause, pre3 ed upon his mind so as to render him completely Avretched, unfit



NEKVOCS EXHAUSTION.

not merely to rceiprocatc the interchange of domestic and matrimonial felicity, but unnerved for all the purposes of serious thought, and the high duties of his sacred vocation. In full possession of the facts of the case, and having secured his unlimited confidence, 1 commenced the treatment of his deplorable infirmity, by the topical application of cold astrin-i;ent washes to the enfeebled organs, with a view to destroy the morbid irritability. Conjoined Avith this, he steadily persisted during two months in my course of alterative and tonic remedies, maintaining a resolute abstinence from all attempts at sexual gratification during that period.

The primary effects of these restorative agencies was lite entire snjyjressioii of nightly emissions; and at the end of seven Aveeks desire became so ungovernable, that, attempting intercourse, my patient had the happiness to find [lie healthy and natunil action of the generative organs entirely restored ; a circumstance that in itself tended, by its effects upon his joyous mind, to maintain their newly accpiirtd power. I received a letter from him a month afterwards, con\eying tlie grateful expression of his warmest thanl'cs ; and I had afterwards



NERVOUS KXIIAtJSTION'.

139

the satisfaction to perceive, from an announcement in tlie newspaper published in the locaiity in whiuli he resides, tliat lie lias lecome a imrenl, doubtless very much to the mutual saiisfaGtiou of himself and the partner of his affections.

Case 1,900.

Albany, ]S[, Y. With the permission of a gentleman, whose introduction professionally to me has terminated in the formation of a lasting friendship, I transcribe such portions of one of his letters as will illustrate his position on his first application to me for advice, and the results of my treatment. He observes: "From my earliest youth I have manifested a susceptible temperament, highly and easily excitable, and, in reference to the sex, the long-suffering victim of passions which I never sought to control. An ardent imagination was the bane even of my school-days, and, in the society of youths, over whom, as well as myself, no vigilant eye was watchful, or perhaps evaded, I gave loose to the indulgence of each prurient emotion as it rose; while feebleness, loss of appetite, and the incipient symptoms of consumption resulted as the disregarded indications of violence, un-



NERVOUS EXJIAUSTIOK.

naturalhj inflicied upon my clehiUlated poivers ilvroiKjli aeJf-poUution. I Avasahvuys accounted Avliat the world calls 'nervous,' and. under the hope of recruiting my shattered constitution, and that I might no longer he tempted to seek for gratification in unhallowed propensities, / determined to marry. My partner (since deceased), and lately the mothar of my only child, Avas every way worthy of manly choice, and in the first im2)ulses of passion, and until the charm of novelty was destroyed, I underM"ent no uneasiness from the failure of sexual power. This state of things did not last long. Anxiously hoping for offspring, and feeling hourly that some strange change had befallen nie. ihe dreadful truth flashed upon my tortured conscience, and I felt that the excesses of youth, though of slow retribution, were dreadfully sure and painful in maturer age. And now the long train of my nervous aihnents darkened around me with tenfold severity: my wife's very silence reproached me with more keenness than open recrimination ; I cursed my very beinc, or rather tlic weakness that had rendered me the victim of thai early and horrible delusion. I doubted of my iiowei's. weakened as they truly were, till llio very doubt ensured



NERVOUS EXHAUSTIOK.

141

their incapacity ; despair, self-loathing, and an apparent cureless melancholy invested the first years of manhood with gloom, and the prospect with hopelessness ; as to the gratification of my wish to perpetuate my name, that I hiul long resigned as a well-merited impossibility. My ordinary medical adviser either did not or would not understand me, and was fain to treat the ailment which evidently distressed all around me upon principles which (knowing he Avas ignorant of the true cause of such suf-fering) only could tend to aggravate tlie mischief. Under these circumstances, as I confess with much reluctance, and with not the slightest hope of benefit, I ventured, first anonymously, to consult you by letter. The tone of your letter cviioldened m.e to make a personal application, and confidence and respect became mutual; your manner riveted that confidence, and from that hour I found a friend, who has inspired the gratitude every man must feel who has been rescued from the cold and cheerless jaws of destruction. I followed your remedies. I implicitly adopted your general advice, and incipient: improvement kindled hopes as to the ultimate result, which lias been most happily realized. I shall not easily forget the feeling



NKIIVOUS EXHAUSTION.

with which my lirst-born was placed in in}' arms. Death has removed her, with whom, but for the circumstances previous to our union, I might have passed, in the first years of married life, a happier time ; at least I feel the returned possession of vigorous manhood, my nervous apprehensions of incapacity are scattered to the winds, and the bitterness of her loss is mitigated in no trifling measure by the consciousness that she saw and hailed mv returnincr health before I Avas deprived of her forever."

Case 3,765.

Brooklyn'. Sir —Accept equally my gratitude and homage to your skill. I assure you it gives me infinite pleasure to report progress in accordance Avitli your request; it is jwiu just four weeks since I commenced with your course of medicine.

During the night of the loth Novemhcr, I had ah emission ; on the IGih your medicine came to hand. / have had one emission si?icr — during the night of the Ith of December; twenty-one clear days.

The first time I took the incdicine I felt it beneficial, but the j^iVs have had a strikingly



NEKVOUS EXHAUSTIOK.

143

wonderful effect ; after taking them I feel so well, so happy, so full of joyous spirit, that I am like a holiday schoolboy next day.

I must tell you that my health and strength are wonderfully increased; my duties, so wearisome before, are nmo light and easy. I work and never lose my enei-gy, or become wearied, hi short, I have lately felt that life is a pleasure. Day by day I have felt better. My friends, public and private, are surprised to see me so well, so strong; I am most sanguine of future health and manly strength.

I thought the emission would never occur again ; imaf/iiied mjselt jierfectly cured. However, the last emission was only slight, but I felt weak in my knees, and had a feeling of exhaustion for all the day after; but it went off, and I felt well and strong again, and still continue so.

The penis has assumed a much larger appearance, and feels more natural and vigorous; it has lost that flabiiness, feels warm, and is never clammy. I begin to feel the natural geniality of the organs. I have rigidly adhered to your rules and advice ; the glutinous matter does not now escape with my urine ; my bowels have been costive and irregular.



NERVOUS EXHArSTION.

My sudden acquisition of strength miyrises me; the di'eams are not so frequent, nor so lascivious. Will the emission, ie aUofjether prevented? Shall I endanger my health bv marrying in twelve months' time ? Will the rules you have given be necessary: I mean with regard to diet, sponging, exercise, sleeping, &c., after I am medicinalhj cured?

I already hail you my regenerator.

Anxiously awaiting a reply, permit me to remain, Avith grateful feelings.

Your obedient patient,

L. D. N.

To L. J. Kahn, Esq., M.D.

Case 2,190.

Milwaukee. " Deak Doctoe —Havingbeen an eye-witness of the extraordinary success of j^our treatment in the case of a friend of mine, who Mas reduced to the last stage of debility jn consequence of his indulging in the habit of Onanism, and being myself a victim to the same viciou^; indulgence, I have summoned sufficient courage to make application to you to solicit the benelit of your skilful advice. For the last ten )'ears I luive indulged in the habit, on an average,



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

145

five or six limes every week ; the consequences liave been very niiirked and striking. I am at ]iresent very mneli debilitated, and -wasted away in flesh. My ai)petito is become extremely bad, thougli at first it liecame actually voracious after I first commenced the practice. J can witli difficulty digest the lightest food ; my limbs are extremely feeble, and I never feel by any chance the least desire for sexual intercourse ; indeed, such an idea never enters my head, though at the age of sixteen I Avas rather forAvard in that particular. I am also unable to apply my mind for any time to any one train of thinking ; and as for memory, I have scarcely any. I also labor under an incontinence of urine ; and, both during sleep and Avhen at stool, I am troubled Avith seminal discharges. Under this state of things, I applied some mouths ago to a medical practitionei- of some repute in this place, but after taking medicine to no end, as prescribed by him, I find not the least improvement in my condition. I have, since reading your book, almost entirely discontinued the ruinous habit Avhich has been the cause of all my sufferings and sorroAV ; yet, so inveterate has been my addiction to the habit, that I am still dragged into the gratifi-



NEKVOUS EXHAUSTION.

cation of it,—but very, very rarely. 1 find my intellect sometimes in a very strange state ; indeed, to be candid, I am sometimes afraid my reasoning faculties are more or less impaired. I trust this exjiosition of my present feelings and state of health will lead you into a knowledge sufficient to enable you to undertake my case. My sole hope of ever becoming a member of society rests on you. The friend of mine Avho directed me to you is now so perfectly re-established in health and strength, that I entertain strong hopes that my case is not entirely desperate. Certainly he was not so bad as I now am.

" May I beg of you to take my distressing and pitiable case into your consideration, and to send me Avord what I must do. Hoping to hear from you as soon as you conveniently can, "I am. Sir, yours resiiectfully,

'^S. M.

" To Dk. Kahn."

"Milwaukee. " Dbak Doctor —To state to you in adequate language tlie grateful sentiments I feel towards you for the state of health and strcngtli to which you have restored me. would be out of



KERVOUS EXHAUSTION".

14?

my power. I tliought such a thing beyond the power of medicine. Oh ! sir, wliat a difference in my present state of vigor and of mental quiet from what I was in hut three months since. All that time I was a wretched, debilitated, and emaciated being, ashamed and degraded in my own eyes, from a consciousness of having been the cause of my own degradation. Now I can hold up my head like a man, can feel like a man, and have good reason to know that I can act like a man—for which I am in a fair Avay of being made parentally to pay. I would like to know whether it will be necessary for me to continue the use of the medicine any longer. The small bottle in the last packet seemed to be a clincher. It wound up all my energies, like the works of a clock. In fact, it seemed to act on me like magic.

" I beg to return to you my warmest thanks for the patience you have had in listening to my many tales of Avoe, and restoring me to the possession of the happiness I now feel. " Believe me,

Yours, very gratefully,

" S. M.

To 1)K. Kahx."



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

Case 2,927.

" Xew Jersey. " (^iR—One of the most pitiable objects tliat ever addressed you now claims yonr mercy and attention.

" I am now twenty-four years of age. but sadly debilitated. I no longer approach a woman. I feel satiated or disgusted with the sight of one—my appetite is nearly gone—my digestive powers are greatly impaired—and I feel no interest Avhatever in wliat is passing around me ; and what is still stranger, the hair of my head has fallen off in a great measure, so that I am almost bald—strangers take me for forty years of age. Having perused your book very lately, a ray of hope darted through my mind that I might find some relief in your judicious treatment. Can you do anything for me ? In the hope that you Avill undertake my case, I enclose you your fee of ^;5, which shall be repeated when necessary ; only do not delay, T implore you, in writing to me. My only hope is now in your skill and experience. If that fail me, I have not a hope left. Do, tlien. take pity on me, as I am nearly broken-hearted. "Your unfortunate correspondent. "Dr. Katin.^' " A. B. C.



KERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

140

"ISTew Jersey.

*'Dear Sir —In my last communication I stated to you that the most unfavorable of tlic symptoms were gone ; that my appetite was reestablished ; the seminal discliarges in my sleep and at stool, were gone; and that my strength and energy were perfectly re-established. I have now the pleasing duty to state that my baldness is very much diminished, so that I have given up the idea altogether of wearing a wig. My desire for sexual intercourse is perceptibly returning, so that I now stand a fair chance of being a better man than I ever was. Oh, sir ! what a lesson I could read to those unfortunate youths who indulge in excessive venery at a premature period of youth. How dreadful have been my sufferings of both mind and body. Thanks to your unremitting and assiduous care, howevei-, my health is now better than I remember it ever to have been.

"I should A-ery much like to have another packet of your medicine, as I am obliged to go a considerable distance from home in ten or twelve days hence, and shall not return for three months. Any advice you may consider



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

necessary you will be kind enough to impart to me in your next.

" I am, Dear Sir, your grateful patient,

"A. B. C.

"Dr. Kahn."

Case 3,759. A threatening of Pulmonary Consnmiiiion from excessive Venery. M. "W., aged fcwenty-fiA^e years, of rather delicate frame, a clerk in a large commercial establishment, had been always of very regular habits in every respect—-had been residing in one of the outlets of New York for the last two years, and, about twelve months before we saw him, he married a young Avidow in whose house he had been lodging, and continued to indulge very freely in the pleasures of the marriage-bed for the first nine months without feeling any bad effects ; about this period, however, he began to lose flesh very perceptibly, and to feel great lassitude on the least exertion ; bis appetite for food also began to fail him ; his sleep became disturbed and nnrefreshing, bowels became constipated ; in fact, all the symptoms indicating a general deterioration of all tlie functions, botli bodily and mental, began to



XERVOUS EXHAU.STIOK.

show themselves; his sight became impaired, as also his memory ; in fact, his mind was so absorbed in the one engrossing idea, namelj^, that of the gratification of the yenereal appetite, ]lo^v^ increased beyond all bounds, that ho became unable to devote the proper degree of attention to his ordinary occupation. He now also began to complain of pain in the upper part of the right lung, and of considerable difficulty of breathing on ascending an eminence; these symptoms having continued for two or three weeks, he began to perceive a sense of heat in the top of the fauces, as also a saltish taste in the mouth, a little after which he began to spit blood of a florid red color and frothy appearance. Being alarmed at this, and having for some time suspected that the cause of his present impaired health was his inordinate indulgence in venery, he called on us, and detailed the history of his case, as we have now given. On examining his chest we observed some dullness on percussion in the upper portion of the right lung, immediately under the clavicle ; the respiratory murmur was also absent from this part; in every other part of the clrest the respiratory function seemed all rioht: the action of the heart was somewhat irregular,



NEKVOUS EXHAUSTIOX.

being very much hurried occasionally, and from the slitrhte.st cause.

We directed that lie should forthwith abstain from all sexual intercourse instanter, a condition imperatively required for the re-es!ab-lishment of his health ; we also prescribed a peculiar diet, and such medicines as the nature of the case seemed to indicate. After lacing about three weeks under treatment, he began perceptibly to recover his strength, his appetite returned, as also his sleep, the pulmonary symptoms gradually declined, the hremoptisis had not returned after the first week he had been under our care, the pulmonary tissue was now perfectly pervious to air, and percussion elicited the natural healthy sound over the chest; in fact, after being under treatment, in all about six Aveeks, he was entirely restored to health. Apprehensive, however, lest he might return to his former inordinate indulgence, Ave recommended his leaving New York for a month or so and returning to his native place, Avhich was in some part of Jersey ; he has done so, and it is but a few days ago since we received a letter from him announcing the perfect restoration of his health and strength, and his intention of resuming his former cmiiloyment.



NERVOUS EXIIAUSTIOK.

153

E-EMAKKs.—This was a case where considerable difficulty presented itself; a jiatient exhausted in strength, with a very serious affection of the lung, for the relief of Avhich depleting measures appeared necessary. It is evident, however, that if such treatment was carried to any extent in this case, the patient must sink; thus, then, Ave had to restore strength, and, at the same time, to combat inflammatory symptoms of rather an alarming nature. By closely watching from day to day the effects of our remedies, we finally succeeded in gradually restoring the strength, and at the same time in keeping down inllammation by the local api3lication of counter-irritants.

Case 1,387. A. E. M., about twelve months before seeing us had contracted gonorrhcea from a casual connection. A slight discharge and scalding made their ai^pearance about seven days after the intercourse. The age of this gentleman was 32, and although he had led a very free life, he had never before contracted disease. His occupation was head-salesman and manager of a large mercantile house ; his pursuits active ; he was a man of great energy, clever in busi-



NERVOUS EXHAUSTIOK".

11688, well educated, and of social habits ; unmarried ; temperament nervous-sanguine. Of course lie knew very well what was the disease, and without loss of time consulted a physician, a friend of his, in large practice. Wishing to cut short the disease as soon as possible, the doctor ordered large doses of balsam copaiva and cubebs, and also applied an injection of nitrate of silver. These active measures seemed at first to produce the desired effect. The discharge, w4iich had never been very copious, was decidedly lessened ; but the patient complained somewhat more of the scalding and pain in urinating. The treatment was continued a few days longer, but the discharge remained and the pain increased. He also found considerable irritation of the bladder—so that he •was unable to hold his urine for any length of time. There w^as also much heat and inflam-' mation about the penis, and small red pustules beo-an to make their appearance on the body, causing intolerable irritation. The appetite was lost, and, in addition, whatevc was eaten caused sickness and indigestion. The stomach revolted entirely from the medicine, which, when taken, was immediately rejected. His friend now discontinued treatment, and ordered



NEKVOUS EXHAUSTION. 155

w arm l)Mtlis and mild aperients. Some six or .'^cven weeks had gone by, and A. E. M. found liimself, as far as the disease was concerned, certainly no better, but in addition greatly reduced in strength, and his digestion so seriously impaired that his stomach could not bear anything in the shape of medicine. A temperate drinker before, he had entirely given up all his usual stimulants, having been so advised liyhis friend. For a week or two longer, sometimes a little better, at other times a little worse, he still continued taking medicine when he could stand it, occasionally trying a mild injection The discharge was thick and greenish ii'i color' scanty in quantity—the nut of the penis and the hps of the urethra blood-red. The pain in urinating now became extreme, and one day havnig been much on his feet, he found towards evening, that he was compelled to pa,ss unne every five minutes. He ha,d l)ecn snfT'er-ing from severe pain in the back all throucdi the day, and he felt himself so ill that he immediately undressed, went to bed. and sent for one of the first surgeons in the city of New York. It proved that inflammation of the bladder had set in, and so much had the patient been reduced, and so obstinate was the case



NEllVOUS EXHAUSTIOK.

ihid it Avus three months hefore lie was able to rise from his bed. But A. E. M.'s troubles Avere not yet ended. After the inflammation Avas reduced, a A ery copious urethral discharge came on, Avhich the surgeon very properly encouraged by every means in his poAver. It noAV became important to endeavor to stop this discharge, Avhich Avas attempted carefully and tentatively. Just as it Avas stopped, and the patient Avas congratulating himself that his disease Avas cyred, the left testicle began to swell, and so great Avas the pain and inflammation, that hc Avas again obliged to take to his bed. Another month, Avhen the other testicle Avas attacked. The treatment adopted Avas leeching, cold lotions, and aperients. It Avould be tedious to continue the history of this case. Suflice it to say, Avhen Ave Avere consulted we found considerable discharge, Avhich, directly it Avas checked, caused immediate swelling of one or both testicles, obliging the patient to lay up, the slightest exertion or exercise causing intolerable pain. What Avas to be done ? I must confess this case required deep consideration, •md when I heard the history, I felt some misgivings as to the result. At first I thought it possible that some complication m the form of



NERVOUS EXHAUSTlOJv.

157

seminal discluii-gc might be present ; hut a careful microscopic analysis convinced mo that such Avas not the case. The discharge was purely gonorrho^al, and although so long a time had elapsed since the infection, strange to say, there was no stricture. Seeing that the patient was so much reduced, I determined to act against all the usual laws of medical men in the treatment of generative inflammation and urethral discharges. I prescribed powerful tonic treatment, and ordered in addition at least two bottles per diem of the best London porter. Although the discharge was copious, and the pain in urinating very severe, so much was the patient reduced and weakened, that I determined at all risks to improve his general health and condition, even if the local disease were thereby increased. But such was not the result. I saw him daily, and from the first hour improvement set in. The diet and medicine together caused a visible alteration from day to day. At the end of a week all pain in urinating, and all tendency to inflammation, had left him. During a month the character of the discharge gradually changed, and, though no special remedies were employed, the quantity greatly diminished. I*.now found the



NERVOUS EXHAUSTIOX.

patient well enough to attempt cauu<jusly to stop the flow. In tliis I succeeded in ten days, keeping np the medicine a Aveek or no longer, lest there should he a return, though I did not fear it. But everything Avent on Avell, and I discharged A. E. M. thoroughly cured, and in a perfectly sound, healthy condition, within six Aveeks of his first consultation. From tha^. •day to the present time there has been no return of the disease, and no unpleasant symptoms whatever.

Eemakks.— It is very frequently supposed, especially by young men, that gonorrh(!_':i is a disease of little or no consetpienee. There is no doubt but that occasionally a cure may be very easily effected. On the other hand, there are constitutions to which one dose of the remedies Avhich are so generally used will act as a virulent poison. To discriminate one from the otlier requires the acute instinct of the educated medical observer. In my hands the ''abortive" treatment of gonorrhcea, by which a cure is frequently effected within three d:iys, has proved invariably successful. AVliy ? Because I never attempt it, except in cases whicli my experience tells me arc amenable to thai vigorous treatment. -And surely it is better to take



NKRVOl'S EXHAUSTIOK.

159

a Aveck to cure, if necessary, than adopt treatment nearly certain to fail, and which must, in case of faihire, protract the disease for a lengtli-cned period. Another Aveek of the "usual remedies" must have cost A. E. M. his life, and when I first saw him I did not feel by auy means certain that I could restore him to health.

Case 4,798.

" Boston, Mass. "Sir —The critical and pressing circumstances in which I find myself ^Dlaced oblige me urgently to solicit your immediate attention to this my communication. I shall give as briefly as possible the history of my case. I am now in the forty-fifth year of my age, and have never been married. I begin to find myself less vigorous in my embraces, and less inclined, because less able, to repeat them. I also experience pains in the lower part of the spine, gleety discharge, occasional dizziness in the head, and, Avhen at stool, emissions of semen. At first, and for considerable time, I took no notice of these things, and did not at all suspect the causes which could have given rise to them. I happened, hoAvevcr, to read in a medical work, some time since, an Mlusion made to



KERV0U9 EXHAL'STIOX.

these symptoms wliicli I have stated tliat I felt, and some (certainly ohsci:re) reference to imperfect coition and premature secession from the female as their prohahle cause. I then consulted your hook, and found that the real cause of my symptoms, which have since, hy the way, hecome much aggravated, Avas to he referred entirely to the hahit in which I had been for so many years indulging. As I wish to he as minute as possible in this my communication to you, I find brevity impossible. I therefore must speak a little in detail : For the last three years I experienced a sort of tremor under mental agitation, whether such agitation be occasioned by ordinary business (I am a merchant) or by venereal feelings. This ti-emor is only occasional, but its recurrence is very frequent, especially of late. I am becoming less confident every day of my virile powers, for I find them much deteriorated. I have lived a bachelor up to my present time, have never been diseased with syphilis, and have now a very excellent opportunity of an extremely good match with a young lady somewhat, nay, considerably younger than myself. One thing only deters m6 from marrying—debdity of the genital organs, and premature emission



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION. 161

of semen. I liave endeavored to make my case as open to you as possible. It is witliin your ]iower, or the power of medicine, to restore me to anything like adequate strength to consummate tlie act of coition ? I am nervous—I am afraid. Write to me as soon as possible your opinion, and if you think medicine cau relieve me, send it to me immediately. The occasion is urgent—that must plead my apolog^^. I enclose fee. If you restore me to the state in which a husband is expected to be, I shall gladly acknowledge it, and remunei-ate you handsomely. Yours obediently, R. S. T.''

Boston, Mass. "Di^AR Doctor— I luive, I know, worried and teased you very much ; but you know too much of the Avretched state of a man's mind, circumstanced as I was, till I consulted you, to feel annoyed at my unceasing importunities and interrogatories. I now find myself comiDletely set to rights—everything as it should be— healthy and vigorous. I no longer feel any delicacy in undertaking the duties and responsibilities of a husband. Prom your assiduous and truly scientific directions and medicines, I am to be married in two or three days. Ought I not continue your last bottle a little longer ?



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

I enclose check, but I never can repay you for your kind indulgence to all my pettishness and over-anxieties. If of any service, you are at perfect liberty to publish the case—of course, omitting my name and address.

*' Ever your obliged,

'• R. S. T."

Case 1,236.

A gentleman of about thirty years of age, who was studying for the bar, consulted me in order to know if I thought it possible I could ever restore him to a vigorous state of health. He had, he said, when a boy, been taught the horrible habit of self-pollution by one of his father's stable lads, witli Avhom he, boy-like, used to ramble about the stables and grounds, and this practice he had continued even long after both his Judgment and his health had warned him to desist; in fact, he told me he was ashamed to say that it was only by slow degrees that he had succeeded in obtaining tlie mastery of himself, and that ho had only very recently been able completely and utterly to abstain. So firmly had the vice fixed itself upon him, that, even after he had made the strongest resolutions, tlie mere sight of anything



NEEVOUS EXHAUSTION.

in the least calculated to excite amatory feeling, or the reading of the most innocent paragraph in a newspaper or book, suggestive, even in the most remote way, of sexual enjoyment, was sufficient to scatter his good intentions to the winds, and cause him to seek the earliest opportunity of solitarily gratifying his most odious propensity. While mentioning these and other circumstances with the utmost candor, he told me at the same time that no mere bodily suffering or ordinary consequences of his vicious-ness would have induced him to undergo the pain of thus unbosoming himself, and of making the disgraceful confession, were it not for two circumstances. One of these was, that unless he could get absolutely cured, he was deprived of all hope of his being able to succeed in his profession ; and the other, that having, for not less than seven years, been engaged to a young lady of great personal beauty and highly cultivated mind, between whom and hmiself the warmest attachment subsisted, the time was speedily approaching when either he must entirely debar himself her society, and leave her to imagine him (without power of explanation on his side) one of the basest and most insulting of men, or fix some period.



NERVOUS EXHAL-STION.

however remote, for their marriage, as the position in life of both parties were such that no obstacle existed to their union. This he very properly declared he never would assent to while in his present condition—and a frightful condition it was. Although stout in body, his face was thin, hollow, and cadaverous ; his flesh was flabby, the scrotum was hanging loose, his limbs Avere weak, his hands unsteady and trembling, his breath Avaa so short that he dared not take even a short walk ; he had pains in his back and loins, besides a variety of other symptoms. He found, moreover, that a gradual incapacity for study had for a long time been creeping over him, a confusion of ideas, an impossibility of fixing his attention upon any subject, and a constant state of wavering uncertainty, restlessness, and disquiet, the sure forerunning symptoms of mental imbecility. Under these circumstances he entreated my aid, if it was at all possible for that aid to be successfully exerted. I undertook the case, and although the evils I had to eradicate were deep seated and of long standing, I at length, by ])erseverance and a careful study of his constitution and ailments, succeeded in etfecting his restoration to ix state of thorough health and



EXHAUSTIOK".

165

vigor. Re has now been three years mai-riecl, has tAvo children, and last year made a successful debitt at the bar.

Case 2,572. A gentleman, a large manufacturing chemist, called upon me early iii May, 1862. He was suifering from a severe case of secondary symptoms. About three months previously, after a casual connection, he had- noticed chancres; and having studied medicine, his business, too, giving him a first-rate knowledge of drugs, he thought he could soon cure himself. He therefore began to take blue pills, with a lotion of sulphate of copper. He was slightly salivated, but the chancres healed, and he Avas delighted to find himself quite well. But, ten days before seeing me, secondary symptoms broke out with the greatest virulence. His throat was severely attacked ; spots broke out all over his body; his hair fell oft (a common elfect of mercury), and his constitution seemed completely shattered. I also found, on careful examiiuition and analysis of his urine, that he was suffering from spermatorrlicea—in fact there Avas a loss of seed every time he passed water. As Avas to be expected, the seed was



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

diseased ; iu fact, sypliilis had affected even* tissue aud secretion of tlic Ijody. The case re-(|uired prompt treatment, and for three or four (hiys the disease continued to make head against Llie medicine. However, I am happy to add that I soon controlled it, and in the course of

seven Aveeks Mr. was perfectly restored to

health and ^•igor.

Case 2,5'JG.

Philadelphia. Captain M. A., three months before consulting me, had observed a small pimple under the })repuce or foreskin, after a casual connection. Having rubbed it off, it was succeeded by another, rather larger, when, thinking it was "tlie heat of the hody," he took mild aperient medicines. It remained stationary for some weeks, and then began to increase rapidly ; he also noticed a large swelling in each groin. Becominc: alarmed, he determined, by the ad-vice of a friend, a brother ofhcer. to consult ]ue ; but, unfoi'tunately, urgent business detained him some days longer. I immediately saw that the case Avas very serious ; the poison had acquired terrible virulence by remaining so long in the body, and, in spite of the most



NiSRVOUS EXHAUSTION".

167

powerful remedies, lie eoiUiniiod to get worsQ for some days. The chiincres progi'essed so rapidly as to threaten the entire loss of the penis, and both bnboes burst, leaving a large cavity in each groin. However, l)y the most energetic means, he-was brought under the in-flnence of the medicines, and liegau to impi'ove, though at first very slowly. This case re(]uired three months' constant attention before a cure was effected, and even then it was necessary to prescribe strengthening medicines for some weeks longer. I instance this case to prove tlie importance of an early application in case of syphilis. Had the patient applied to me in tlic first instance, one week's attention wonld ha\ e been quite sufficient to insure a thoi-ough cure, without pain or annoyance. I have lately received a letter from Captain M. A., stating that he is now thoroughly Avell, and as strong as ever.



PICTURES FROM REAL LIFE.

These are not intended to challenge criticism, nor to excite idle curiosity. Many may see them for Avhom they will have no interest—who may, perhaps, hardly understand them. They will, however, fall into the hands of some few who will thoroughly comprehend their purpose, and for whom they will have a solemn interest. They are, to those few, addressed in earliest solicitude, by one who desires to minister to their sorrows and to mitigate their infirmities. I ask, in good faith and kindness of lieart. one favor from the person wlio may receive tliis copy. I beg of him to read it carefully, thoroughly ; and if he finds in it nothing that has a personal application to him. to present it to some young man of his acquaintance. It may thus find a reader for whom it will have a jycniliar personal iufera^f. I enti-oat that reader to weigh my words calmly and deliberately, for on the decision of thai ])rosent ten miunies will hang in all human probal)ility. the happiness or misery of his fulnro days, in that.



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

169

time may be determined wliether he shall live an ornament to society, an honor to his name, a healthy, happy man ; or whether he shall sink into the poor, pitiful, joyless, nerveless, prematurely old man, Avithout heart, health, or hope.

PICTURE FIRST : THE Y0UNC4 SENSUALIST. " The g\ovy of a. young- man is bis strength."

In the great battle of life there is need that each combatant should have a brave heart and vell-braccd nerves, for the fight is long and arduous, and the weak and timid have no chance therein. Nor is the work all toil : the high endeavor—the end in view—makes of it a ]ileasure, and as we watch the busy passers-by in the broad thoroughfares of the city, every face seems eager and earnest. No, not every face. Here comes one, alone—a solitary one. He is young, hut he has none of the busy characteristics of his fellow men. Listless in his manner, timid in his air, he Avanders rather than Avalks through the croAvded street. Maybe he is a clerk, or a student, or a mechanic. But why is he so vacant and so sad ? It is but three or four short years since, Avith a father's blessing and a mother's prayers, he Avent forth into



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

the Avorld to coiujuer fortune, and " to make himself u man." Then his nerves were firm, his mind m-us biujyant, his step was light, and iiis hopes were liigh. But these few short years lia\e Avrouglit a sad and fearful change. NoAv neither hope nor ambition finds a place in his bosom. The fresh vigor of his youth is replaced by a weariness of life, even while his foot is yet but on its threshold. See hoAV vacant and objectless is his gaze ! His hand wanders to his forehead, wiiich it feverishly presses, whilst a deep sigh escaping him tells of nervous exhaustion, and of a mind brooding over darkling thoughts. If you knew him as a child you are struck Avith the change. Then he was robust and stout ; noAV he is thin and pale. Then his eye Avoiild flash fire, as he dashed with energy into some boyish game ; now he turns aside from old companions.and frowns on what. Avcre once delights. And, hark ! that hectic cough that shakes his frame, exhausts his breath, and tells of an uiidermined constitution, and, i)erhaps, of the dread apjiroach of consumption.* 8peak to him. What says he ?

He has been ill, and growing Avorsc for a year or so. He ciiniiot nccount for it, and the doctor docs not seem (o do him any good, or to



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION,

know Avhilt is the cause of his illness. His eyes arc weak a-nd his memory gets very bad." Poor fellow! It is a sad tale. Is there n» solution ? Yes ; come with me.

It is nio-ht time. He has retired to his bed. Let us lift the veil of night, and gaze on him when he fondly fancies that no eye is upon him. Does he sleep the sleep of conscious rectitude-enjoy the Avelcome repose of a self-satisfied mind ? No, alas ! What tempest of passion— what hurricane of lust is this that sweeps across his soul ! Why do liis strained eye-balls glare on vacancy ? Why docs his cheek flush now like fire, now become pallid as death ? Why docs his poor heart now beat as if it w^ould burst through its tenement of flesh and bone, and anon scarce indicate a fitful pulse ? And now, why does he sink, sighing and exhausted, helpless and almost lifeless on his pillow ? The fearful truth is all revealed. Sensuality has only too faithfully painted its deep lines on his body and mind. The picture is only too complete. Before you lies a poor, self-destroying, self-debauching, nerveless, joyless Onanist.

" A shocking picture, indeed !" some of my readers exclaim, "but surely a little overdrawn?" Not so. The silent tortures, the



NERVOUS EXHAUSTIOX.

voiceless sorrows endured by those who persist, from year to year, in the practice of Onanism exceed the descriptive i)OAvcr of my pen. or of any other. Instead of exaggerating, everv true mmd sinks appalled from the magnitude and sternness with which these evils haunt the footsteps of those who persist in tlie praclice, whether wilfully or ignorantly. The following description of his case Avas written to me some years ago by one who is now a happy husband and father :—

" I was well and happy nntil the age of fifteen, when I learnt the habit from a companiun at school. To me it Avas like a hcav revelation, and my ardent temperament caused me to indulge to-a fearful extent. As T l)eeame older a sentiiaent of shame Avithhekl me to a, cei-lain extent; but only three montlis ago. when I l)e-came possessed of your admiralile liook, did I entirely relinquish the habit. And now, through fatal ignorance, Avhat Inn e I liecome ? "a wretched, nerveless invalid ; dreaming instead of Avorking. My energies exhausted, my face pallid, my forehead covered Avitli blotches, my appetite sometimes voracious and unnatural, rnd anon not lo be iemplod liy the choicest viands. Pjiin, bcaAy pain, and deep languor



iTEnvors exhattstiok.

from morning till night. My eyeballs ache and throb ; I suffer acutely when I pass water ; my groins seem weak, so tliat I cannot enjoy exercise. When it is morning, I long for the night; and then, what nights I pass ! Lascivious dreams disturb my }'est; my sleep is fitful and nnrefresiling. Long hours I lie awake, fre-qnently in a profuse perspiration, reflecting on my awful condition, and my thoughts embittered by the knowledge that surely my 'sin has found me out.' Oh ! sir, as you hope for blessings here and hereafter, exert your utmost skill to rescue from destruction a blighted wretch.''

This is a picture drawn by the hand of a sufferer. A few short weeks more, perhaps, and his application to me Avould have been in vain. Ilis constitution would have been utterly ruined.

Again, had ho applied to a general practitioner, Avho lacked the special opportunities I have now for thirty years enjoyed of studying the intricacies of these cases, he would probably long ago have been consigned to the grave, instead of surviving, as ho does, in health, honor, and happiness.



NEltVOUS EXHAL'STIOX,

PICTURE second: the bachelor SEXSUALIST.

In every community tliere are many middle^ aged men, av]io from clioice or necessity hava not assumed the responsibilities of married life. It may be tliey liave failed to secure one M-hom tliey have fondly loved in youth ; it may be tliai they have determined to secure a higher position and a more assured income before marriage. As a general rule these men are hard-working, energetic men of business, strictly temperate, well educated, saving in their habits, and higlily esteemed in society. But there are amongst them others altogether different—men of shy habits and downcast looks, sometimes of morose and peevish minds. In what should be the very prime of their life they find their constitutions failing them. They have well-grounded fears that manhood, vigor, mental and bodily, are fast leaving them. I have been consulted by many such. Their usual theme has been, " Why do I suffer ? Have I not led a sober, temperate, sensible life ? Have I ever been guilty of dissipation or debauchery ? :\Iy life has been regular ; I have kept early hours— lived in good, well-ventilated, cheerful homes; my diet has l)een sound and wholesome, and I



NEBVOL'S EXHAUSTION.

175

have taken sufficient and regular exercise." All this is true. Every rule tending to health and happiness has heen ohserved, save one. Understand, my friend, the blood is the life. Do you know that one ounce of the semen is eqniva-Jent to TPORTY ounces of blood? Be no longer ignorant—you are answered. The secret sin— the sin of Onan—has been draining your heart's blood for years. Be assured that no man can commit evil without evil consequences—for " Sorrow tracketh wrong forever and ever."

When the constitntion is healthy and vigorous, it may resist the consecpicnces for years ; but the nltimate effect will be all the more a^^ravated. The vital force, unable to bear tlie Avaste of more than life, gives way suddenly. The healthy middle-aged m:i.n becomes a confirmed invalid. Worse—infinitely Avorse is it Avhen such a man ignorantly marries. I remember such a case. The gentleman Avas about forty years of age. Ho liad gradually Avorked his Avay up (Avithout capital) irom the position of book-keeper, at a fcAV slnlhngi5 a week, to salesman, buyer, and nltimately partner in one of the greatest commercial houses in the city of G. This fact speaks volumes for his mental activity and unblemished integrity.



NEKVOUS EXHAUSTIOX.

IIg was a personable man, stout of limb, healthy m appearance, but a confirmed private sensualist. Years had passed since he first addicted himself to the unfortunate habit—yet hitherto his system had resisted the constant drain upon its vital resources. Not that he has been without warnings. Sometimes a failing eye, a wandering mind, an unwilling stomach, jierchance restless nights, and vague discomfort. He soothes his conscience, and says,''-'I work too hard, I have indigestion, I Avill take a holiday. "' And now he thinks it is time he should marry. His position is assured—he is a wealthy man— his ambition is satisfied, and he will seek to bo hai)py. He is to all outward appearance an acceptable husband ; his character is beyond reproach. He only knows of one disreputable phase which disfigures it, and that he determines to abandon forever, in order that he mav be fit for the pure and virtuous embraces of his bride-elect. His sin has found him out ; those Avho will not be Avarned must be punished ; unhappily, too, tlie innocent must suffer also. He marries, and on the nujitial couch, in tlio arms of her he loves, he—poor self-deluded, self-ruined sensualist—discovers that the vigor of manhood has departed from him forever !



NEBVOrS EXHAUSTION. 177

PICTURE THIRD: THE MARRIED SENSUALIST.

The sacred ordinance of marriage emanates from the Deity, by whom we are enjoined to "mcrease and multiply." Hence it is considered honorable amongst all men, and should not be entered upon carelessly or Avantonly, nov without duly considering the causes for wliich Jt was originally ordained. A happy marria,o-e IS the bond of social purity, as it is the crown of domestic joys. But it frequently happens that young men injure themseh-es seriously— and even permanently-by the lengths to which during the first year or two after marria^-e, they carry the indnlgence-or, to speak more accurately, the coercion-of the sexual faculties, ihose who have never had the advantage of friendly advice are apt to make serious mistakes as to the extent to which intercourse should take place.

Let me warn the newly married couple of the dangers of excessive indulgence, which not only ruins the health, but soon renders intercourse utterly repugnant. In such a case, when the vn-ile powers of the man fail him, and he no longer discharges with alarcity and effect the duties of a husband, the wife, not knowino-



178 NERVOUS EXHACSTIOX.

that she herself contributed to his impotoncy, but feeling a lack of warmth and vigor in his embrace—if not an absolute incapacity for sexual duties—begins to believe that it is elsewhere he seeks for gratification ; and jealousy and discord mar domestic peace.

It is my solemn duty, therefore, to entreat those newly-married, who may have "'overstepped the modesty of nature," to pause ere the knell of all their mutual joys boom forth in the solemn words, " Too Late ! "-and to take steps to counteract the evils they have, perhaps unwittingly, invoked. Ten mniutes advice and instruction, added to skilful and mild treatment for two or three weeks, are often sutTicient in these cases to restore tone to the debilitated organs, and renew, as it were, the bonds of love between husband and wife. The lesson, too, proves valuable, and is not often forgotten.

But there is another and more frequent cause of matrimonial unhappiness—a cause to which I have already directed attention.

Subjects of grave and painful importance re-ciuire plain and intelligible language. I ^viU therefore say, emphatically, that the destrm.-tivc habit of self-abuse, practised in early life,



XJ^KVOITS EXHAUSTION. J 79

fearfully injures the energies concerned in the reproduction of our species, and the due fulHl-ment of the nuptial rite. And it unfortunately happens that a man may abandon self-abuse as a voluntary act, and yet not be free from the consequences of his former folly. A new and unnatural association has been established between the organs of generation and the mind —involuntary discharges of semen take place during sleep ; the seed is lost in the urine, at sfool; and muscular fibres surrounding the seminal ducts become relaxed, and all control over their actions is entirely lost. Let not any, then, imagine that having incurred the judgment of guilt they shall wholly escape the penalty, unless by prudent and prompt action, and attention to skilled advice, the instant the knowledge of that guilt and the certainty of its fearful consequences occur to them, they adopt the only measures by which the scourge can be averted. Therefore let us solemnly warn any young man now contemplating marriage, and who may at times have indulged in the secret vice of the solitary sensualist, not to take upon himself the s;icred obligations and responsibilities of a husband until he is fully satisfied that his blood, his nervous system, and hig



180 NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

procreative powers arc free fro,u the effects of his past indulgence.

PICTUUE EOUKTir : TI^Vn>O^VKR SEKSUALIST.

A man who conld sit in my consult^ing room and listen day hy day to the weary tales of sm and suffering, folly and

continually poured into ^n.y ear, .v>thout occ -sionally weeping with the ^-^^'''^'^'"^'^ .vhose sternness and stuhhornness o hea:t I do ot envy. For myself I do not hlush to confers :^l;d:Jing such confessions I am frenu^Uy compelled to give outward ^'g-l o n re pathy for the suffering uarrator ; and the mo e fheav of those sufferings, the more I heeome -co:::ious of the grossignorancpd..^^ the medical faculty in regard to istics and treatment of nervous and s xu d . eases the more devoted do I become to k r^llty I have made of those diseases for he S^SiHy years, and the move determnunl ,s ^y^ olutL to persevere to the end n the very depths of scientific study and re.ea ch. r^ dito^onquerthe difficul.es a end,ng theniagnosisof such disease, and ren 0 successful treatment hy me a ser.e. of P'ofes sional triumphs.



NERTOUS EXHAUSTlOis-. 181

Of all the pitiable phases presented by the practice of self-abuse, none is so pitiable as that of the man wlio, havin,cr lieen l)ereft of the ])artner of his bed and lioine, aJ.aiuh.ns himself to the tyranny of self-lust, and thus lu-ocipi-tates himself into a dark and dismal ^ulf of boddy and mental affliction.

Some time since, I Avas visited by a middle-aged man, ^vho desired to consult me. and ]ieard from him the following- extraordinary statement:—

_ He was a respectable tradesman, in business m Brooklyn. Twenty-seven months ago he had unfortunately lost his wife, to whom he was much attached. He had been married to her about fourteen years, and was left with a family of eight children. His circumstances were prosperous: he had a good business, and lived comfortably and well. He assured me most solemnly that during his wife's life he had never once been unfaithful to her. Shortly after her death, he began to feel himself nu.ved 'J the passions of sexuality. He endeavored o resist the influence ; for havingbcen faithful o his wife during life, he had resolved to honor bor virtues and love by remaining faithful to ber memory after death. Over and above which



182 NERVOUS EXlIArSTlOlN.

ho had an uttcv abhorrence of the evils of promiscuous sexual intercourse ; and had also fully determined never to bring to his children a step-mother, who might probably —however careful his selection—prove anything but a second mother to them. His only hope, therefore Avas a resolution to resist the strong proiuptings of sexual desire. This he did for some time, but eventually, and unhappily, his resolution gave way, and in an evil moment he took to the practice of self-pollution.

In this practice he found a means of ridding himself of the irritating sexual secretion ; and totally unconscious of the danger to his health -nay, his very life-involved in the practice, he continued in unrestrained indulgence of the mad passion for a considerable time.

Of late, however, he had felt his health and strength giving way ; his nights had become sleepless ; ■ and he had almost constantly indulged in the practice in order to procure sleep But the sleep resulting had at all times been feverish, fitful, and accompanied with dreams of the most unpleasant kind

He had also lost all relish for food-was absent-minded and remiss in business, and felt 'that premal.uv ohl ago was fast creeping up..n



NERVOUS EXPIAUSTION. 183

him. He had consulted his usual family doctor who had attributed his ill-health to the indulgence of silent grief for the loss of his wife and to the worry and anxiety of an increasinc^ business. Up to this time not a thought had ever crossed his mind that self-abuse was the cause of his misfortune. He happened, however, to come across one of my works on Nervous Debility/' and reading it carefully, was at once struck with the knowledge of the fact. He lost not an instant, but immediately leaving his house, hastened to consult me, and placed himself under treatment that very night.

On examination,—and especially on making a careful analysis of his urine,—I found this patient very much debilitated, and the generative organs functionally deranged. I also saw enough to be able to inform him, in the most positive manner, that if he persisted any further m the practice of self-abuse, his nervous system would entirely break down, and the attributes of manhood be lost to him forever.

Never was there a more docile patient And consequently, he was under treatment a very short time before he began to take heart I could tell, by the increased buoyancy of his air every time he visited me, that he was in the



184 NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

way of rapid improvement. He was all but restored to bis former health. I induced hini to substitute a regular and restrained hal)it and diet for his former free living; and instead of his business being—as his former adviser told hiin__a source of misery and ill-health, he found in it a relief, and a healthy and pleasurable mode of maintaining the vigor and

serenity of his mind and body.

This is not a solitary case—many such have

come under my observation ; and even now can

I recall one which had not a termmation so

favorable.

Argument and entreaty were alike without ■ivail The habit, relinquished for a week, was acain and again indulged in. As the constitution became more and more impaired, so the powers of the will decayed. Business and pleasure alike lost their hold on his memory, his thoughts or his appetite ; and a few short months saw him consigned-harmless enough, to be sure-to a private lunatic asylum, where he finished the miserable remnants of his days in the darkness and dimness and dospan- of a living death.



NERVOUS EXHAUSTIOK.

185

PICTURK fifth: the sceptic sensualist.

I can imagine one of my readers, wlio lias glanced with rapid eye over the preceding pages, M'ho may exclaim sotto voce, " Ay, ay, doctor ; it is all very well, and I dare say there are some ^\vo or three in a million to whom tJiese facts and descrijjtions apply, but they apply to very few ! I believe that a man may practice self-abuse for years, and really suffer no evil conse-cpiences. I know tbat 1 have no time, no means, nor opportunity of indulging myself in the pleasures of a connubial life, and I have resorted to this habit to relieve myself of the promptings of nature, and I am neither sick nor diseased ; I have had none of the evils yon speak of, and I don't think I ever shall."

My reply is, " Gently, my friend ; do not dra\v rash conclusions. Listen patiently for a few minutes, and I think you will own yourself in tbe wrong." If you are an Onanist; if you have at any time abandoned yourself to that vice, Avhich has been aptly called "adultery of the mind," / defy tjou to ftay Irtilhfulhj that you have not experienced effects more or less evil. I challenge you, as an honest man, to say whether you Inive not had your warnings ? I



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

beg of yolu specially you, sceptical roader.— infatuated abuser of yourself,—to answer to your OAvn soul, in truth and sincerity, a few questions of solemn import touching the effects of self-abuse, not on another man, but on yourself—on your own precious body and mind.— Answer them truly, seriously, in the solitude of your own chamber, and tliink ere you reply. Are you an Onanist ?

In pursuit of the baneful and degrading practice of self-abuse, have you ever felt it to be a sinful practice—unmanly, unchristian, and degrading you l)eneath the level of the brute beast, Avhich in following the mere promptings of instinct never falls so low ?

Have you ever yet oxce practised it without, in tbe very act, making up your mind that you would never repeat it ?

Do you suffer from involuntary nocturnal emissions ? Are you ever troubled with erections without apparent cause, failure of erection when desired, or premature discharge of semen during coition ?

Have you dull pains in the groin, pains in the back ? Does your sight fail you ? Have you nervous headucho ?



JN'KKVOI S EXHAUSTION. 187

Are you subject to pimi^les ou llie face, l)ack, or forehead ?

Do you suffer from a hacking ct)iig]i, for Avhich all remedies seem uiuivailine: ?

Are you fatigued with the slightest exertion, and does lassitude of body and mind overtake you without cause ? Are you restless when fatigued, and unable to obtain refreshijig slumber?

Have you lost energy, appetite, i)ower of enjoyment ? Are you frequently averse to society, even of intimate friends ? bashful in female society, unable to join in conversation ?

Does ■ your memory fail you ? arc all your senses blighted ?

Do you fall iiito dreamy fits of abstraction, brooding over the past, hopeless as to the future —all the noble aspii-ations forgotten which gilded the morning of your career ?

Honestly, thoughtfully, mournfully recalling your past life, are you not certain that your health would have been better, your heart stouter, your hopes brighter, your mind and thoughts purer, more dignified, and manly, if you had not acquired for yourself your o^vn self-reproach ?

Let the victim of his own evil passions ansM^er these questions, among a thousand such as I



NEilVOUS EXHAUSTION.

could propose to him. Answer them truly, honestly, and witliout mental reservation, as between Heaven and his own conscience. And if the answer to them, or any part of them, be the one emphatic ''Yes," how Avill he dare to say that he has indulged his vile appetite for solitary excess without experiencing some of its attendant evils ?—without having had emphatic warning that his sin is finding him out, and that days and nights of woe and torture are now impending, unless he accepts the Avarniug. and reverently retraces his steps from the evil path he has chosen ?

Let him, therefore, earnestly endeavor to lead a new life, lest in the future day, as he has sown the storm so will he reap the whirlwind. When the tempest of passion and of lust shall haxc left him, bereft of all but an enfeebled mind, and a body racked—preyed upon by the tortures of a memory bitterer even than death.

But I hope that many who read this will turn from their error,that truth will prevail,that their conscience will be awakened—alas! so many en-through ignorance. And if this little book is instrumental in saving even oxe who would other-wisehave been lost, from evils leading to destruction,! am aniply rewarded—it has not been written in vain.



NEEVOUS EXHAUSTION. 189

PICTURE SIXTH: THE PROMISCUOUS SENSUALIST.

Nearly four centuries ago, the swarthy sailors of Columbus, returning from the enterprise which added another hemisphere to the known Avorld, brought Avith them that terrible plague which has since been one of the curses of civilized life—

SYPHILIS.

It is not my intention to write at large on this subject ; for fuller information I must refer my readers to my work on "Nervous Debility."

The most mysterious characteristics of this disease, and the most to be dreaded, is that by poisoning the blood and tissues, it entails misery years and years after the patient has been api)a-rently cured. And not alone on himself—the poison being absorbed in the blood becomes hereditary, even to the third and fourth generations. As much to be dreaded as the disease itself is the mercurial treatment almost universally adopted by the general practitioner for its cure. I do not hesitate to assert that more carious bones, diseased brain, and shattered constitutions have been produced by the ex-



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

hibition of this poisonous miueral than by the disease itself.

Let me in all cases earnestly advise any man suffering from disease not to attempt self-cure. Let him at once apply for assistance to one in whom he can place confidence—and more especially to one who has made a specialty of these cases. It is not sound sense and reason, that one whose practice is devoted to a particular complaint should better know how to cure than one who may see half-a-dozen cases by mere chance in twelve months ? One warning and I have done. A young man, having contracted a venereal taint in his single career, not knowing of any impediment, may marry, and innocently be the means of fastening upon his otTspring manifold evils—and thus render his own and wife's, as well as their lives, an intolerable misery and burden. Tliis ought to be guarded against in every instance by a consultation, when marriage is contemplated.



Notice to Patients and Invalid Readers.

Dr. L. J, Kaiin, having- for many years exclusively devoted his attention to the treatment of the diseases of the generative and nervous SYSTEM described in tlie preceding pages, may be consulted personally from ten in the morning till two, and from five in the evening till eight, daily, at his permanent residence, 51 East Tenth Street, between University Place and Broadway.

The following directions are given to all who desire to consult Dr. Kahn :—

1. The hours of consultation are from 10 A. M. till 2, and from etoSP. M.; on Sundays till 2 P.M., at the Consulting Rooms, 61 East Tenth Street, New York.

2. Dr. Kahn's fee for consultation is $5.

3. Dr. Kahn maybe consulted by letter; and patients at a distance are requested to be as minute as possible in describing the symptoms of their cases, age, habits, occupation, etc., and if any treatment has been previously adopted. Much of Dr. Kahn's practice is carried on by correspondence, and he has been successful in curing numerous cases which have been conducted by letter only. All letters must contain the consultation fee.



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.

4. Dr. Kahn hasinadc arrangements by wliich the necessary remedies can be forwarded, safely packed and free from observation, to all parts of the Avorld ; and. it is his invariable custom to destroy all correspondence, or to return it to the patient at the termination of each case. Patients may have letters and packages forwarded by initials. The disclosures of a name is neither sought nor necessary ; the most perfect confidence may be relied on, so that no difti-dence or timidity may prevent the application for professional relief. Patients are, however, requested to retain the same name or initials throughout the case, in order to prevent confusion.

5. I)r. Kahn wishes to impress the importance of one personal interview, even with patients resident at a distance, more especially when it is necessary to make a microscopic or chemical analysis of the urine. In fact, this is of such importance that it would be advisable for those consulting him by letter to forward a small bottle per rail, carefully packed to prevent breakage (carriage paid), containing the urine passed in the morning.

C). Pr.Kahn's permanent residence in N. Y. is: 1)1 Kast Tenth Stukkt,

BKT. UNIVKRSn Y I'l.ACE AND BKOADWAV





