THE SILENT FRIEND.

ANATOMY OF THE ORGANS OF GENERATION.



The great importance of the organs of generation, and their preservation in a state of health and vigor have been admitted by the concurrent testimony of ancient and modern writers; in fact, the due and proper performance of the special functions with which they are charged has ever been considered essentially necessary to the health and well-being of the economy, both physical and mental. They are parts of admirable construction, form, and use, and constitute a striking evidence of the wonderful skill and contrivance in the adaptation of a special mechanism in the system for the performance of one of its most important and essential functions,—that of the propagation of the species. Unequalled in the delicacy of their texture, and the comparative minuteness of their structure, their peculiar fitness for the functions assigned them in the economy, when they are in a state of perfect integrity, excites the astonishment and admiration, alike of the anatomist and the philosopher. Their very complexity, while it renders them liable to many disorders by any of which their utility may be impaired, is wisely rendered subservient to the important purpose of separating and purifying the vivifying fluid.

Like that complex and delicate piece of machinery, a watch, constructed by human skill, the organs of generation in man,—a still more complex and more delicate apparatus, created by the Divine will, are liable to derangement and impairment of function and structure from many causes, the nature and effects of which will be investigated in the following pages. In order however that these may be fully and clearly understood, it will, we think, be advisable to preface the observations we propose hereafter to offer respecting them by some notice of the anatomical arrangement and physiological action of the organs which are immediately subservient to the function of generation, and also of those which are only indirectly connected therewith.





The parts in man which are immediately connected with the function just alluded to, are, as has been already stated, of a complex nature and very delicate structure. They consist of the testicles, by which the semen or seed is secreted, and of their appendages, through which the seminal fluid is transmitted to the urethra at its origin near the neck of the bladder, and of the penis or yard, by means of which the act of copulation takes place, and through a canal in the under part of which, called the urethra, the seed is conveyed from the receptacles in which it is retained, to those organs in the female, which are engaged in the function of generation.

The urinary organs, both in the male and female, may be regarded as subsidiary to this function, and many of the diseases to which they are liable exert a malificent influence on its performance, and not unfrequently produce impotence, either temporary or permanent, according to the nature and severity of the disease.

The kidneys, which are the organs solely engaged in the secretion of the urine, are glandular bodies of an oblong shape, seated on either side of the spine, upon and below the two last ribs, and behind the stomach and intestines; the right kidney is also under the liver, when the man is in the erect position, and the left under the spleen: the right kidney is generally the lower and the larger. It is said that these organs are more considerable in size in those persons, whose passions are very strong, and almost uncontrollable, than they are in those who are less addicted to women.





In shape the kidney resembles the kidney-bean; its structure is almost wholly made up of arteries and veins, with a few small branches of nerves, derived partly from those which are connected with the ribs, and thence called intercostal, and partly from a branch from the stomach, thus causing a great sympathy between those organs. The arteries by which the kidneys are supplied with blood, which is partly used for the support of the organ, and partly for the secretion of urine, is derived directly from the aorta, or great artery of the body. When it enters the kidney, which it does about its middle, it divides into branches, which again are divided into smaller ones, and these into still smaller, until they terminate in vessels so exceedingly minute as to be invisible to the naked eye. From these the veins are formed, and by these the urine is secreted, and falls by drops into a pouch which is situated about the middle or lower part of the organ, and which forms the commencement of the ureter. The vein joins the great cava vein, and discharges its blood into what is called by anatomists the great portal system, by which it is conveyed to the liver, after it has been freed in the kidney from a certain portion of its serum, and also from certain salts. The nerves of the kidneys are few and small, so that the organ is not endowed with much sensation.

The ureters are long, hollow tubes, and constitute the continuation of the pelves of the kidneys. There is one on each side of the body, and they pass downwards, and slightly inwards to the back and lower part of the bladder, which they pierce, running between its coats for about an inch, so that if the bladder should become exceedingly distended, its contents would not be forced back into these tubes. They are well supplied with branches of arteries, veins, and nerves, and their sensibility in a state of disease is considerable. Their use is to convey the urine from the kidney into the bladder.

The bladder is situated in the part of the body called the pelvis. It is of considerable size, and admits in some instances of distension to a degree that would hardly be credited, were it not a well-known fact. This power however is not acquired without considerable risk to health and life. This organ in man lies directly on the bowel, but in women the womb intervenes between it and the rectum. It is of an oval shape, constitutes the great receptacle of the urine, which, when it has collected to such an amount as to become a source of inconvenience, is by a voluntary effort, got rid of through the urethra,— a prolongation of the bladder, commencing at its neck, and extending along the under surface of the penis, as has been already stated. The bladder is well supplied with arteries, veins, and nerves, and is very sensitive when in a state of disease. It has three coats, one of them being composed of muscular fibres; its constriction causes the expulsion of the urine: it has on that account been called the detrusor urince.





The neck of the bladder, which in man is longer and narrower, and in woman is shorter and wider, is surrounded by a sphincter muscle, by which the continual running away of the urine is prevented, unless from disease the muscle has become useless.

The secretion or separation of the urine from the blood by vessels appropriated for that purpose, constitutes the principal functions of the kidneys. The fluid, when secreted is carried along the ureters into the bladder,—the great receptacle in which it is retained until from its state of distension, its evacuation by the urethra is required.

The process by which the secretion of urine is effected is one of exceeding interest, and admirably adapted to display the wisdom of the Divine machinist. The blood from which it is to be separated, is conveyed to the organ, as has been already mentioned, by the renal artery, which divides into branches supplying different parts of the organ, and these again in their turn form arches of communication with each other, whence spring minute arteries or branchlets, these again constituting a complete network of vessels by a general inosculation. They terminate in the commencement of veins, and also in uriniferous tubes, by which latter the separation of the urine is effected. The crypts or cryptce, small round or oval bodies, which are found everywhere in the network of vessels just spoken of, and which consist almost solely of vessels, are by some supposed to be the origin of the uriniferous tubes. The tubes terminate in a mammillar process, which projects into a small membranous bag, called from its shape the infundibulum or funnel; into this bag the urine passes from the uriniferous tubes, it is thence conveyed to the larger pouch called the pelvis, and afterwards through the ureter into the bladder. Several of the tubes terminate in one mammillar process, and so also several of the mammillar processes open into one infundibulum. The last-named pouch, like the pelvis of the kidney, the ureters, bladder, and urethra, is defended from the acrimony of the urine by a secretion of mucus which lines and sheaths its inner coat.





The quantity of urine, and the celerity with which it is passed after certain fluids have been taken into the stomach, have induced in some persons a belief that vessels existed, but which have not yet been discovered, forming an immediate communication between the stomach and the bladder, unconnected with the kidneys. But the quickness with which fluids can be absorbed and conveyed to the thoracic ducts, the velocity of the circulation, and the great quantity of blood carried by the renal arteries to the kidneys, will account for the celerity with which urine is separated, without having recourse to the supposition of unknown channels. From the extensive communication which the nerves of the kidneys have with those of the alimentary canal, it is not improbable that the secretion of urine from the blood may commence before the absorbents have time to carry any quantity of water, received into the stomach, into the bloodvessels; nature being aware that these vessels would be overcharged, did not a separation of some of the watery fluid already in them immediately begin.

That the secretion of the kidneys is much influenced by passions and ideas of the mind we need only instance in proof, the effects of fear on quadrupeds, infants, and even on adult men in suddenly increasing the quantity of urine, and producing an insurmountable desire to void it. In patients labouring under some difficulty from stricture in passing urine, the mind referring to the complaint will often greatly increase the secretion of that fluid, and multiply the calls to pass it from the body. This will be exemplified in a subsequent chapter.





The renal capsules are concavo-convex bodies, seated immediately above the kidneys, imbedded in fat, and freely supplied with blood principally from the renal artery, arising directly from the great arterial trunk, and from other vessels, Its nerves are derived from the great sympathetic. In the interior there is found a cavity, containing a fluid of a dark saffron colour, the use of which and of the renal capsule itself we are as yet ignorant of.

The prostate gland, of which we shall speak more fully, when treating of the anatomy of the organs specially concerned in generation, is in immediate connexion with the neck of the bladder; although not in fact directly engaged in the process of generation, it is more intimately connected therewith, than any of the parts which have hitherto been considered. Under the same head the urethra may be regarded; it is indeed more closely connected with generation than the prostate, inasmuch as the seed-receptacles open into it, and the seed itself is ejected through it. Although then the prostate and urethra constitute a portion and a very important one of the urinary organs, a description of their anatomy will be better understood, after the organs specially engaged in the function of generation, to wit, the testicles, deferent vessels, seminal receptacles, etc. have been described.

The scrotum or purse, is a bag of skin, divided about the middle by a septum, so as to form two cavities, in each of which a testicle is contained. The situation of this septum is marked externally by an irregular line called the raphe. The contraction or corrugation of the scrotum, which occurs at times, is said by some anatomists to depend on the action of a muscle which they call dartos. This however is denied by others who do not admit the existence of this muscle.





The testicles, or organs which secrete the semen, are nourished and supplied with blood by long and tenuous vessels which arise from the main arterial trunk, and are called the spermatic arteries; the blood which they thus receive, serves for the elimination and secretion of the seed,—a process which is effected by the pesuliar action of the testicles, and which secreting power affixes to these organs a value and importance in the human frame, not even second to that which attaches to those generally regarded by anatomists as the more noble, being those the destruction or serious impairment of the functions of which may involve loss of life. The value which men place on these organs (the testicles) is rendered evident by the fact that suicide is not unfrequently caused by their supposed or real imperfection, and that men on whom the operation of castration has been performed, in consequence of cancerous or other serious disease affecting the testicles, generally become moping and melancholy, and speedily perish. The same thing occurs when from a similar cause the penis has been amputated; nor is the feeling of dejection and extreme wretchedness consequent on these operations confined to persons in the prime of life, and previously in the full enjoyment of the functions of reproduction. Old men, even those in whom, from the effects of advanced age, all desire and capacity for sexual intercourse have entirely ceased, when deprived of these organs by a surgical proceeding, fall the victims of an insatiable melancholy.

Eunuchs, who have been castrated prior to the possession of those feelings which nature causes to spring up in man after the period of puberty, are of course not subject to the same degree of depression and wretchedness of mind and body, as are those who are rendered impotent, after having shared in the happiness and delights of matrimonial intercourse. Their disgust of life arises from witnessing the comforts which others enjoy, from which they are for ever debarred, and which they have no means of fully appreciating. There is also a marked difference in the external characteristics of a man and of an eunuch. The latter are rendered, by the degrading operation to which they have been subjected, more effeminate in personal appearance than are those who are in the full vigour and enjoyment of manhood. The voice resembles that of children, the hair becomes thin and delicate, the limbs are small, the beard and whiskers do not grow, or at best are thin and scattered, and the mental faculties are prevented attaining either vigour or penetration. Most of these changes and differences in the constitution not unfrequently attend the operation of castration, when performed during manhood, if it be complete,—that is if both testicles have been removed. They do not however occur at once, but take place gradually; erection and even emission may be effected on more than one occasion, after both the testicles have been removed. When emission occurs some months after castration has been performed, it is not seminal, but simply the secretion of the seminal vesicles and the prostate gland.





The ancient Romans would not allow any one to bear witness against another in a court of justice, unless he were perfect in the organs of generation,— unless the testicles were sound and entire. The papal clergy so far carry this rule into effect that no one can be admitted a member of their priesthood, against whom a similar defect can with truth be alleged.

It occasionally happens that the testicles which before birth are lodged within the cavity of the abdomen, immediately before the kidneys, do not descend into the scrotum or purse, but remain in the belly, generally within what is called the abdominal canal. Sometimes one only is retained in the abdomen, and that generally the left. In this situation they are exposed to various causes of disease, and although not absolutely deprived of the power of secreting seed, yet their action is generally more or less imperfect, in all probability from the compression they undergo, and the constant irritation to which they are subject, from the narrowness of the canal by which they are in fact somewhat elongated and flattened, and smaller than usual.





An apprentice of the late Sir Astley Cooper, in whom the testicles had not descended, committed suicide, from the fear that he was impotent. His body was examined after death, and the seminal vesicles were found to be full of semen; the testicles themselves, which were both within the abdomen and close to the internal abdominal ring, being nearly, if not quite of a natural size. In another case, that of a lad nineteen years of age, only one organ was retained in the cavity of the abdomen. It was smaller than its fellow, but the ducts, etc. were perfectly healthy.

The non-descent of the testicles from the abdomen into the purse does not however necessarily involve the infliction of impotence—the greatest physical curse to which manhood can be subjected.

The spermatic artery, as has been already remarked, is given off by the main arterial trunk; it is a long, undulating, and tortuous vessel. The blood which is thus conveyed to the organs, after having been employed by the testicles for the separation and secretion of the seed, is re-conveyed in a refuse state by other vessels, called the spermatic veins, back to the general circulatory system in the body. The double set of vessels, the arteries and veins, were called by the older anatomists the vasa preparantia, as being the parts principally concerned with the testicles in the preparation of the seed.

The spermatic arteries are remarkable, besides their length and tortuosity, for their smallness, which prevents their containing more than a small quantity of blood at one time. They pass obliquely downwards and outwards, behind the peritoneum, and are contained in a common protecting sheath with the veins, forming with the nerves of the testicles what is called the spermatic chord; they then run over the psoas muscles and ureters, and pass out through the rings of the abdomen and abdominal canal, over the os pubis or share bone, and into the scrotum, which the spermatic artery enters, and, as already remarked, supplies the testicle. This organ also receives blood from the artery which supplies the vas deferens.

The latter named organ, which is invested in its own sheath, called by the name tunica vaginalis, is composed of the body of the testicle, and the epidydimis, the latter being situated at the upper part. Its substance is of a white, soft, and apparently pulpy nature, but in reality it consists of an infinite number of small tubes, called the seminiferous tubes, which terminate in the epidydimis. These tubes are convoluted on each other, and closely connected together, but when unravelled, and injected with quicksilver, will extend to a considerable length.





The spermatic veins arise in three sets from the testicle, two of which soon unite. They are exceedingly tortuous in their course, and freely anastomose with each other, while in the lower part of the cord, but these inter-communications cease after they have entered the abdominal canal, on leaving which while crossing the psoas muscle, they unite together, and form one vein, which on the right side terminates in the lower vena cava, and on the left in the vein which arises from the kidney on that side. Their use has been already mentioned. The larger veins are provided with valves. The nerves of the testicles are principally derived from those which supply the kidneys. They take the same course as the spermatic arteries, and constitute with them and the veins the spermatic cord. Some branches of the hypogastric plexus join the spermatic nerves in the cord, and form with them a kind of network or interlacing with their branches, which mingle with and embrace the blood vessels supplying the testicles. The spermatic nerves are finally distributed to the substance of the organ, to the due performance of the function of which they are subsidiary.

The testicles are generally two in number, one on each side of the scrotum or purse, but cases have been published in which there has been only one testicle, and others again there have been found three, four and even, although very rarely, five testicles. The older writers, by whom some of these cases have been mentioned, considered the possessors of so unusual a number of testicles, to be more than ordinarily salacious. This latter statement is more than doubtful, and it has sometimes happened that a small tumour has





assumed the character and appearance of an additional

testicle. The occasional although rare occurrence of

a third testicle has however been placed beyond all

doubt. Dr. Macann, a staff surgeon in the army,

published an instance of this, which came under his

own observation, a few years since. The person in

whom this anomalous condition took place was a

recruit about twenty years of age, and the additional

organ was on the right side, nearer the groin than

the proper testicle. It had its own spermatic cord,

which joined the cord of the other organ at the upper

parts of the purse, and the vas deferens could be

distinctly felt in each.

Persons having three testicles are called triorchides; those who possess only one are known in science by the name of monorchides. These latter cases are equally rare, and those which are detailed by the older writers equally doubtful, as the instances of triorchides, already alluded to. Some few instances however have been published by modern authors, and in some of these the facts having been examined after death, the non-existence of one of the testicles has been clearly ascertained. Instances also have been known in which the unhappy sufferers have been eunuchs from birth, having been born without either testicle.

Where these important organs are natural in size, number, and general appearance, they are generally nearly two inches in length, one and a half in the transverse direction, and one in thickness. The tunica vaginalis or investing membrane of the testicles which has been already alluded to, consists of two layers, the inner one directly enveloping the testicle. It secretes a kind of semen, which serves to lubricate it. Between the two layers of the vaginal tunic is contained the fluid hydrocele, or dropsy of the purse. In some eases the cavity formed between the two layers of this membrane remains continuous with the cavity of the abdomen. In such instances there is the double danger of the occurrence of what is called congenital rupture, and also of the extension of severe inflammation from the cavity of the vaginal tunic to the abdomen.





Between the testicle and the tunica vaginalis, there is another tunic or coat called the tunica albuginea, which is smooth, white, and inelastic, composed of fibres and structure. It completely covers die testicle, but not the epididymis. At the upper, back, and outer part of the organ, it forms a projecting body containing the blood vessels, and part of the glandular structure of the testicle, as well as the seminal canals of the rete. Astley Cooper called it mediastinum testis. The unyielding character of its tunics is the cause of the intense pain which is experienced, when the organ is swelled and inflamed. The testicle is also invested and protected by a muscle called the cremaster, which is formed partly by some of the fibres of the oblique muscles of the abdomen, and partly arises from the lower part of the spine of the ilium, and from the pubis. It acts as a third coat or tunic to the testicle. It expands all round the tunica vaginalis, which it closely embraces, forming a hollow muscle, within which the testicle and its tunics are contained, and which, when it is in action, contracts and draws the organ it encloses upwards to the abdomen, sustaining and compressing it, and forcing out along the vas deferens the semen previously secreted by the organ. The action of this muscle is principally involuntary, but it has been found in some few instances to be under the control of the will. The cremaster muscle is small and indistinct prior to puberty; after that period it is greatly developed in persons who are very muscular, and is exceedingly well marked in cases of old rupture or hydrocele.

It has been already observed that the substance of the testicle consists of an infinite number of small tubes, which are called the tubuli seminiferi, or seminiferous tubes. These are very numerous; their number has been calculated by Lauth at 840, and their entire mean length at 1750 feet, the mean length of each duct or





tube being twenty five inches. They communicate readily with each other, and thus constitute one vast network of communication. Their calibre is of varying diameter in different individuals, and is also modified by the age of the party, and the state of activity or of rest of the organ itself. They are much larger in an active adult in the prime of life, while the organs are in full vigour, than they are in the child or old man. They differ occasionally also in the testicles of the same individual, the calibre of the seminiferous tubes in the one testicle being greater than that of the other. In their course in the body of the organ, they converge towards the part described as the mediastinum; then two or more tubes unite, and form a conical lobe, the point of which opens into the mediastinum testis. Of these lobes there are between four and five hundred in each testicle.

The epididymis, which, it has been stated is seated at the upper and back part of the testicle, is the continuation of the numerous seed-bearing tubes; it descends along the back of the testicle, gradually becomes larger in diameter, but less convoluted until it begins to ascend, when it obtains the name of vas deferens. It is longer than the testicle, being about two inches in length, and four or five lines in width. It consists principally of seminal canals from which arise in the after part of the rete testis, the vasa efferentia, or efferent vessels, of which tubes there are generally twelve in number, although there be sometimes as many as thirty. All these ducts, after numerous and close convolutions, unite with or rather terminate in the canal of the epididymis. Their average united length has been estimated by Lauth at nearly eight feet, the separate length of each being rather more than seven inches.

The parts of the epididymis known as its body and tail, are composed of the convolutions or twistings of its canal. This latter is very irregular in size and length, averaging generally when unfolded and drawn out about twenty feet. It varies greatly both in length and calibre in different individuals. The walls of this canal, unlike those of the vasa efferentia, are very strong, and will bear considerable violence. It terminates in the canal called the vas deferens or deferent vessel, the excretory duct of the organ, and is generally narrower in calibre at the part where it unites with the vas deferens, than in any other part of its course.





There is sometimes a blind canal found connected with the epididymis or deferent vessel, which has been called by Haller the vasculum aberrans. It is as large in diameter as the canal of the epididymis, and is generally from eight to fourteen inches long, although it only passes along the cord for two or three inches, when it either terminates in a dilated extremity, or else gradually diminishes in size, and finally disappears. It is much convoluted in its course. It is not of unfrequent occurrence, although in perhaps the majority of instances it is not present. As many as three vascula aberrantia have been found. But little is known of the real use to which this blind canal is subservient in the economy. By some it has been supposed to be a supplementary vas deferens; others again conceive that its office is merely the secretion of a fluid to assist in lubricating the part composing the epididymis,—while others again regard it as a mere diverticulum, accidental in its formation, such as is occasionally met with among the intestines.

The vas deferens or deferent vessel, the excretory duct of the testicle, forms a constituent part of the spermatic cord, and is readily distinguished from the arteries, veins, nerves, and absorbents by its cartilaginous feel. It is firm and round in shape, and it has been supposed that its parietes or walls were muscular. It is continuous with the under part of the epididymis, and ascends along its inner side, forming numerous convolutions until it passes beyond the testicle, when it joins the spermatic vessels and nerves to form the cord. It then enters and passes through the abdominal canal; after which it leaves the cord and plunges into the pelvis, passing backwards in the form of an arch on the outside of the peritoneum, to which it adheres; it passes first by the side of, and then behind and below the bladder, inclining gently inwards in its course, towards the cervix of that viscus, until at last, about the base of the prostate gland, it comes in contact, but does not communicate with the vas deferens of the opposite side. It terminates in the seminal vesicle, immediately above and behind the prostate, and with it forms the ejaculatory canal, which perfoiates the prostatic part of the urethra. As the vas deferens approaches its termination in the seminal vesicle, it increases in breadth and capacity, becoming again gradually smaller as it reaches the prostate.





The testicles in the foetus are situated in the abdomen, posterior to its lining membrane the peritoneum, immediately below the kidneys, and in front of the psoas muscles. The epididymis is about one third larger relatively to the body of the testicle than it is in the adult. Connected with each of these organs while in the foetal state, is a soft solid body of a conical shape, which is called the gubernaculum. It is attached to the lower ends of the testicle and epididymis, and to the origin of the vas deferens. It passes out of the abdomen in the course taken by the testicle, through the inguinal canal and the abdominal rings, downwards into the scrotum, to which it is attached. It is surrounded with a layer of muscular fibres, and is supplied with blood by a branch from the artery of the vas deferens. The testicle between the fifth and sixth month of fcetal life, is gradually drawn by the contraction of the muscular fibres enveloping the gubernaculum and by the action of the cremaster muscle from its situation near the kidney, upwards towards the internal abdominal ring. Towards the close of the seventh month it is generally found at the ring, traverses the inguinal canal during the next month, and finally towards the close of the period of pregnancy, is generally to be discovered in the scrotum. As the organ progresses through the abdomen and the canal, it pushes before it a reflexion of the peritoneum, which subsequently becomes the tunica vaginalis, which has been already described. The gubernaculum, meanwhile, gradually becomes everted, and its muscular fibres constitute a kind of investing covering to the vaginal tunic, the remaining portion of its texture contributing to form the loose cellular tissue, which is





found so abundantly in the scrotum. Its attachments to the bottom of the scrotum gradually disappear after the descent of the organ, which they were intended to facilitate. This however is not always the case. In some instances in which the testicles have not descended further than the abdominal ring or the inguinal canal, some portion of the gubernaculum may still be in existence, and may even retain some of its enveloping muscular fibres.

The non-descentof both testicles is of comparatively rare occurrence. When one only has descended, it is more frequently the right than the left. It sometimes remains permanently fixed in the situation which it occupied when the child was born, but it occasionally descends prior to puberty, most generally between the second and the tenth year. The descent has been known to occur soon after birth. Wnsberg mentions several such instances. The causes of this non-descent are not at present well known; they may however depend on the occurrence of abdominal inflammation prior to birth, or on some imperfection in the muscular apparatus by which the testicle should be drawn into the cavity of the scrotum. When the bodies of persons who have been the subjects of this non-descent have been examined after death, filaments or bands of greater or less length have been discovered binding the organ to some of the parts in the abdomen, and it has even been found adhering to one- of the intestines. This singular cause of the non-descent of the testicle can only be attributed to previous inflammation. The small size of the abdominal rings may also operate as a cause preventive of the descent of the testicles. An operation has been performed under such circumstances to relieve the organ, and place it in the scrotum, and it was followed by success. It was however attended with great difficulty and inconvenience, and the cure was very tedious.

The vas deferens in cases of undescended testicle is generally of exceeding length, so as to present a greater degree of tortuosity than usual.

With respect to the state of the organ itself, and its fitness for the purposes of generation, when its descent has not taken place, some observations have already been made, and the case of a pupil of the late Sir Astley Cooper adduced, to show that they may and do possess their powers, and in full integrity. Mr. Hunter was of opinion that the organs under these circumstances would be necessarily very imperfect, and perhaps even utterly unserviceable for the purposes for which they are designed by nature, but the only ease which came under his notice in man, in which both testicles were retained in the abdomen proved the contrary of his position, since the individual had all the powers and passions of a man.





Mr. Owen, the celebrated comparative anatomist, in commenting on the opinions just cited, observes, "it seems remarkable, that with this experience, Mr. Hunter should have formed from inconclusive analogy, and promulgated an opinion tending to occasion so much unhappiness, as that which attributes exceeding imperfection and probable incapacity of performing their natural functions to testicles which in the human subject are retained within the abdomen. That there is nothing in such a situation which necessarily tends to impair their efficiency is evident, from the number of animals in which they constantly form part of the abdominal viscera; and in those in which the testicles naturally pass into the scrotum, their continuance in the abdomen, according to our author's own observation, is accompanied only with a difference of size or shape; now we may readily suppose that this may influence the quantity, but not necessarily the quality of the secretion."

This opinion of Mr. Owen's has been confirmed by the examination of undescended testicles in other cases besides that of the late Sir Astley Cooper's pupil— other instances are however mentioned, in which, apparently from the non-descent of the testicles, but not improbably from some other cause, the passions and feelings peculiar to manhood were not developed, and in at least one instance of non-descent, the organ which was the right testicle, when examined after death, as it lay in the abdomen, a little above the internal abdominal ring, was found not to be larger than it generally is at the age of two years, and to present similar anatomical characters. The organ belonged to a lad sixteen years old. The left was four times as large.





In a case which came under the notice of M. Cloquet, the testicle, the left in this instance, was detained in the inguinal canal. It was flattened, elongated, and in a state of atrophy, in fact so small that it could not be felt externally. The epididymis was situated an inch below the testicle, with which it communicated by fine white transparent vessels, running parallel to each other, and formed by the seminiferous tubes, unravelled, and drawn out. The vas deferens came off from the lower part of the epididymis, and entered the inguinal canal, where it passed by the side of, and internal to the testicles. The organ itself was contained in a hernial sac. The patient in this case was forty years of age.

It may be readily understood, and experience supports the opinion, that, although the retention of the testicles in the abdomen does not generally impair their generative powers, yet if they be detained in the inguinal canal itself, where they are subject to continual compression, and exposed to injury from blows, etc., which they are unable to escape, then their utility may be impaired, although even then it does not follow that it must necessarily be lost. The consequences resulting from their compression or from direct injury are frequently very severe. Permanent disease in the organ may also be ultimately induced as their result.

With respect to this, Mr. Pott, one of the ablest of English Surgeons, remarks, "I do not know any particular inconvenience arising from the detention of a testicle within the cavity of the belly, but the lodgment of it in the groin not only renders it liable to be hurt by accidental pressure, etc., but when it is so hurt, may be the cause of its being mistaken for a different disease, and thereby occasion its being very improperly treated. To which considerations this may be added, that there is no kind of disease to which the testicle is liable in its natural situation, but what may also affect it in any or all its unnatural ones." The





very circumstance to which Mr. Pott refers, actuallyoccurred in a case to which he was called. A young sailor, who had one of his testicles detained in the inguinal canal, injured it by a blow, and the subsequent symptoms so resembled those of strangulated hernia in that part of the body, that Mr. Pott was called in to operate. He- discovered the nature of the accident, and the patient was cured, fortunately for him, without an operation. Similar cases have occurred to other surgeons.

It occasionally happens that, independent of their non-descent, the testicles do not attain their full size and powers of secreting semen. This state has been termed an arrest of development,—a phrase the meaning of which is simply that the organs at a certain period of life prior to puberty, have ceased to grow. A case has been described of a gentleman, who, when in his twenty-sixth year had a penis and testicles, which were not larger than those of a boy eight years old, and another of a man, thirty years old, in whom those organs presented a similar appearance. Such instances are not beyond the influence of medicine, unless perhaps when they occur in the persons of idiots.

Wasting or diminution in the size and powers of the organs may occur at any age. The testicle is generally of the proper shape, although diminished in size, but feels soft, having lost its elasticity and firmness. It is pale in texture, and its blood vessels appear to be less in number, than in the healthy state. The secretion contained in the seminiferous tubes is entirely devoid of spermatic granules and spermatozoa, the nature and use of which will be mentioned in a short time. In some instances the organ undergoes what is called the fatty degeneration. The spermatic cord is also generally affected by the extension of the disease; the nerves shrink, the blood vessels are reduced in size and number it is said, and the cremaster muscle disappears.

When disease of the organ is the cause of its atrophied condition, it becomes altered in shape, being uneven and irregular, and sometimes elongated, as well as diminished in size and weight. The proper glandular structure also seems to have nearly if not altogether disappeared.





Among the causes of this atrophy of the testicles may be enumerated impeded circulation, pressure, want of exercise, and loss of nervous influence, as well as certain causes which specially affect the organs. Atrophy is an occasional result of local inflammation, whether arising from a special cause, or from the transfer of inflammation to the testicle in cases of mumps. Excess in sexual intercourse and onanism are also efficient causes of an atrophied condition of these important organs. They will be alluded to more in detail hereafter. It is generally preceded by a low kind of local inflammation.

Injuries of the head, especially of the back part, have not unfrequently been the cause of atrophy of these organs, and it has been known to occur without any apparent cause.

The fact that injuries of a severe nature affecting the back part of the head are followed by such a result would tend to support the views of the phrenologists that the seat of sexual desire is in the cerebellum, which is there located, and between which and the organs of generation they say there is great sympathy. The brain either in its entire, or in that particular part of it, undoubtedly exercises great influence on the desire for sexual intercourse. In fact the influence of the mind on the organs of generation, and of the latter on the mind is completely reciprocal.

So much similitude is there in the structure of the brain and of the testicle, as well as a most extraordinary sympathy between them, that experience in the course of a practice extending through a series of years, has demonstrated that there are many cases where the human mind suffers under a species of derangement, in consequence of diseases of the organs of generation, especially a tabes dorsalis, and for this solid reasons may and will hereafter be given.

The vas deferens, a duct as important as the testicle is itself, inasmuch as it is the canal through which the semen is conveyed to the seminal vesicles, is occasionally, but rarely, imperfect, or greatly deficient in some part of its course. It sometimes terminates in a culde-sac, more or less near the organ from which it arises. In some instances when this occurs, the testicle itself is imperfect, in others, in appearance at least it seems to be healthy, and the seminiferous tubes contain semen abounding in spermatozoa. Sometimes the epididymis is altogether absent, or partially imperfect. Occasionally the vas deferens is of unnatural shortness, and terminates in a seminal vesicle, not situated in its ordinary place, and totally unconnected with the urethra. All these constitute serious and important impairments of the generative functions, because although the testicle itself may be perfect in its structure, and fully capable of performing its duties, still is it rendered useless if its deferent duct be imperfect. Fortunately however such deficiencies are of rare occurrence, and when they are met with, are generally found to afFect one organ only, leaving the other fit and capable for efficient action.





The semen, or fluid secreted by the testicles, is always when evacuated, mixed with the secretions of other structures, such as those of the seminal vesicles, the prostate gland, and the mucous glands of the urethra. To examine semen in its pure state, it should be obtained from the deferent vessels of an animal recently dead, in whom death has ensued from accident or intention, and not from disease.

On examination, the seminal fluid is found to possess many of the properties of other animal mucilages. It is of a blueish-white color, and nearly of the consistence of cream, but more unequal. That which is first discharged by living animals has nearly the properties of what is found in the vasa deferentia and other vessels of the testicles; it is whiter and more opaque, while that which follows more resembles the common mucus of the nose, but is less viscid. It has, when first voided, a peculiar heavy smell, which has been compared to that of the farina of the Spanish chesnut. This odor appears to be derived from the secretions of the seminal vesicles, prostate and mucous glands of the urethra, as pure semen obtained from the epididymis or deferent vessel has not any such smell. Its taste is said by one of our most eminent physiologists to be at first insipid, with however a, certain degree of pungency; after a little time it stimulates and excites a degree of warmth in the mouth. Vauquelin describes it as having a sharp and slightly astringent taste. Its specific gravity is greater than that of any other fluid in the body; it sinks in water, is coagulable by alcohol, is soluble in nitric and sulphuric acids, is softened by vegetable acids, evaporates by heat, loses its viscidity on the addition of lime water, which however is increased by potash and soda, and it is thickened by ammonia. When exposed to air, it soon liquefies, and then becomes specifically lighter than before, but it always remains heavier than water. When it does liquefy, it will combine with water at any temperature, but it will not do so at the time of ejection, nor will water dissolve it at any temperature, from zero to the boiling point, if it have not been previously liquefied.





According to the detailed experiments of Vauquelin, which were published in the Annales de Chemie for 1791, and which have been quoted by Fourcroy, Richerand, and others, human semen appears to be composed of ninety parts of water, six of common animal mucilage, three of phosphate of lime, and one of soda. It exhibits a very marked alcaline character, changing the syrup of violets green, owing to the soda which it contains. The animal mucilage is not pure albumen: but Richerand observes it should rather be considered as a gelatinous mucus, on which its indissolubility in water, its odour, and spontaneous liquefaction seem to depend.

The application of the powers of the microscope to semen has shewn that very minute bodies swim in it; these move with rapidity, and from their various motions, from their avoiding obstacles, their retrogression, and change of velocity, they have been regarded as animalculae. They are formed like a tadpole, with a round head or body and a narrow tail. They are found in very great numbers in healthy seminal fluid, and closely crowded together. Ludovic Haume is said to have been the discoverer of these animalculae, and to have shewn them to Lewenhoeck in 1677. Lewenhoeck has claimed the discovery as his own.





These animalculae are not found, it is said, in the fluid contained in the seminal organs before puberty; but are always present afterward, and do not disappear while man retains the power of procreation, having been met with in persons of a very advanced age; they are stated to be either imperfect or altogether Wanting in that of mules. The more general character with respect to these tadpoles in the semen of mules is that they are greatly deficient in number, and very imperfect in their formation. Some physiologists have asserted that they are also absent from the semen of persons who are suffering from, or have been much debilitated by continual disease. The theories which have been formed respecting their nature and uses have been very various.

These animalculae or tadpoles are now called spermatozoa, as it is yet a question among physiologists whether they are independent parasitic animals, or merely animated particles of the organism in which they exist. A spermatozoa consists of a flattened oval and perfectly transparent body; terminating in a filiform tapering tail, which together measure from one-fiftieth to one-fortieth of a line in length. Wagner has shewn that they are developed within cells, and originate from the spermatic granules, being formed by the dispersion of the nuclei of these cells.

These animalculae are peculiar to the spermatic fluid, and constitute the chief characteristic of this secretion. They live for many hours after they have been ejected from the urethra; the application of blood does not injure them, but that of urine renders their motions feeble and hastens their death.

The spermatic fluid also contains a number of minute, round, colourless, granular corpuscles, which vary in quantity, but are usually much less numerous than the spermatozoa. Both these elements of the sperm are suspended in a clear transparent fluid termed the liqour seminis, or seminal liquor. The' quantity of seminal fluid emitted during the act of sexual congress varies from one to two or three drachms.

There is a singular fact connected with the history of these animalculae, that they have been discovered in very large numbers, and in a very lively state on more than one occasion in the fluid removed by operation from hydrocele, both simple and encysted. In the former or simple hydrocele, their presence has been attributed to a wound of the testicle by the instrument used in operating, and in the encysted form, it is supposed that it is owing to a rupture of one of the seminal tubuli.





It has been already remarked that the tadpoles or spermatozoa are imperfect or deficient in the semen of mules, or hybrid animals. Hence depends in all probability the impotence or sterility of those creatures. They are generally utterly incapable of generation. There are however instances, both among the mammalia and birds, of individuals belonging to species universally held to be distinct, uniting and producing young, which again were prolific. That the mule can engender with the mare, and that the she-mule can conceive, was known to Aristotle. The circumstance is said to occur more frequently in warm countries; but it has taken place in Scotland. Buffon states that the offspring of the he-goat and ewe possesses perfect powers of reproduction. We might expect these animals, with the addition also of the chamois, to copulate together easily, because they are nearly of the same size, very similar in internal structure, and accustomed to artificial domestic life, and to the society of each other from birth upwards. There is a similar facility in some birds, where such unions are often fruitful, and produce prolific offspring. The cock and hen canary birds produce with the hen and cock siskin and goldfinch; the hen canary produces with the cock chaffinch, bullfinch, yellow hammer, and sparrow. The progeny in all these cases is prolific, and breeds not only with both the species from which they spring, but likewise with each other. The common cock and the hen parti idge as well as the cock and guinea hen, and the pheasant and the hen can produce together.

Notwithstanding all these and perhaps other examples which might yet be adduced, the general rule is that hybrids are incompetent to perform the act of generation, so as to produce offspring, and it is a wise provision of nature that such should be the case, to prevent the world being inhabited by monstrous creatures, as would be the case, were it the general rule that fecundation followed the act of copulation, when practised by the offspring of parents of different species.





The vesiculce seminales or seminal vesicles are two sacs or oblique bags, behind and below the bladder, between it and the rectum, and closely connected with it by cellular tissue. That part which is applied against the bladder is concave, the opposite surface convex. They occupy an oblique position, their lower extremities being separated only by the deferent vessels, while their upper ends are at a considerable distance from each other. The latter are the larger, and their greatest breadth is generally three or four times less than their length; and their thickness is about one third of their breadth. They are about three fingers' breadth in length. Their size varies in different men, but this variation does not seem to depend upon bodily height, for in some men of short stature, they are in every respect larger than in others who are tall. Their external appearance is unequal, in consequence of their consisting of several convolutions, which by long maceration and careful dissection may be unfolded, when they will appear as long vessels with openings on the sides, which originally were so applied as to correspond with each other, and, to permit the contents of the vesicles to pass through them from one part of the tube to the other. When distended they apparently consist of large irregular cells; this is more distinctly seen when they have been inflated, and dried, and then laid open.

The vesiculae seminales have two coats, the outer one of which presents a musciilar appearance in man, and is exceedingly well marked in some quadrupeds; the inner coat is much more vascular, and is every where on its inner surface formed into small cells of a honeycombed appearance, from which there are short projecting villi; these cells are irregular both in size and shape, and are not dissimilar to those on the inner surface of the gall-bladder and biliary ducts; the inner





coat has thus every appearance of being, and no doubt is, a secreting membrane. The seminal vesicles are well supplied with arteries, veins, nerves, and absorbents. Near the prostate the cells cease to appear; the vesicle contracts, and forms a kind of duct, which unites with the vas deferens at a very acute angle, the place of union being marked by a projecting septum, or valve, by which the contents of the deferent vessel are directed into the seminal vesicle.

The ejaculatory duct, thus formed by the union of the vas deferens and seminal vesicle, is from half an inch to three quarters long; it continues to become narrower as it passes behind the third lobe of the prostate, perforates that body, and, running some way along the under surface of the urethra, enters that canal obliquely by a small opening on the side of the caput gallinaginis.

The junction of the two vessels which form this common duct is such, notwithstanding the acuteness of the angle, that air gently thrown into the vas deferens by a blow-pipe, will inflate the seminal vesicle before it enters the urethra, but if thrown in with violence, it will immediately inflate both the urethra, and the seminal vesicle.

When the fluid contained in the seminal vesicles is examined, it appears of a brownish color, and much thinner than the fluid found in the deferent vessels; it varies both in consistence and color in different parts of the vesicle. In smell it does not resemble the se,men; nor does it, like the semen, become more fluid by being exposed to the air. In bodies which have been dead some time the color is of a darker brown color; this might be supposed to arise from the contents in the vesicle having undergone a change in their sensible properties from putrefaction; but when the contents of the vesicle and deferent vessel of the same side have been compared, they have been found to be different in appearance, and in other properties. Hunter examined the contents of the seminal vesicles in some cases very soon after death, and found that although of a lighter color than usual, there was not any smell like that which is so peculiar to the semen. He therefore concluded that the seminal vesicles did not serve as receptacles for semen, but simply secreted a kind of mucus of their own; and although their peculiar use had not been ascertained, it was, he thought, reasonable on the whole to conclude, that they were together with other parts, subservient to the purposes of generation. As additional reasons for entertaining the opinion that the seminal vesicle did not act as a seed-reservoir, Hunter ascertained that their peculiar contents were always found in the vesicles of those persons, who, for some reason or other, had undergone castration of one of the testicles.





The seminal vesicles in animals present many peculiarities, and in some they are altogether absent. In the horse, they have not any communication with the vas deferens, or at all events the common passage is so short as not to admit of regurgitation from the vas deferens. They are not of the same size in the gelding and the stallion, being larger in the latter, but the contents are similar and nearly equal in quantity in each. They are very large in the boar, and divided into cells of a considerable extent, having one common duct. They have no communication with the deferent vessel, and their contents are dissimilar. Neither have they any communication with the vas deferens in the rat, nor in the beaver—in the latter they open on the caput gallinaginis, and are convoluted. In the guinea pig they constitute long cylindrical tubes, and have not any communication with the deferent vessels.

These facts however do not afford a demonstrative and conclusive proof that in the human subject the seed may not pass into the vesicles from the deferent vessels. There is no anatomical or mechanical structure calculated to prevent such occurrence; for, notwithstanding the acuteness of the angle between the two vessels at their junction, from the length of the common tube, the wideness of that part of it formed by the vesicle where the two vessels meet, and the very small aperture by which it opens into the urethra, the fluid (which from the length and contortion of the seminal tubes, must pass very slowly from the testicles) will insinuate itself much more readily through the large communication with the vesicle, than through the very small one with the urethra, unless it be prevented from so doing by the vesicle attempting to throw its contents into the urethra at the same time. During coition this attempt is made, and both fluids pass at once into the urethra, where the fluid secreted by the vesicles being added to that coming from the testicles by the deferent vessels, between them a proper quantity is produced to distend sufficiently the sinus of the urethra, that the muscles of ejection may act on its contents with more power.





The same effect may be produced, whether the deferent vessels and seminal vesicles communicate or not, provided that they both open near each other into the urethra, and both convey their contents to it at the same time.

In the dead body it has often been found that air or any fluid when not thrown into the vas deferens with much force, will fill the vesicle before it enters the canal of the urethra, and on examining the contents of the vesicles, although the fluid contained near the fundus differs in color, consistence, and smell from the semen, yet that found near the neck is often very similar to it; or to the fluid contained in the enlarged extremities of the deferent vessels.

From the frequent excitement of the passions and their gratification being denied in the civilized state of human society, fluid must often be secreted in the testicles at times when it cannot be naturally evacuated; and although the accumulation of it in this organ sometimes produces tension and pain, the fulness of the vessels often subsides without these unpleasant symptoms having taken place. Thus, when the vis a tergo no longer drives the semen slowly on, the muscular properties of the vas deferens may assist in conveying that fluid on towards the vesicles, which may receive it until the time of ejectment arrives. They may thus, under particular circumstances, more likely to occur in the human species than in brutes, be employed as reservoirs, although their ordinary use may be to secrete a fluid which mixing with the semen during coition, may render the act more perfect, and more likely therefore to produce fecundation.





Aji additional reason may be adduced in support of the theory that the seminal vesicles act as reservoirs for the seed in man, in the well-known fact that animals possessing a penis, but destitute of seminal vesicles, remain for a long time in sexual contact, because the fluid necessary for fecundation, from the long course it has to take during copulation, only flows from the urethra drop by drop.

A distinct communication between the seminal vesicles and the deferent vessels takes place only in man, and in those animals which most resemble him in form, as in the whole tribe of the simise. The vesicles are altogether absent in the lion, panther, cat, and dog. ,

Lawrence, in his lectures on the physiology of man observes; "because the vesiculae seminales in some animals, do not communicate with the vasa deferentia, and therefore cannot receive the fluid secreted in the testicles, it has been inferred that they do not serve the purpose of reservoirs for the seminal secretion in man; where however they have so free a communication with the vasa deferentia, that any fluids pass into and even distend the former, before they go on into the urethra. The organic arrangement is different in the two instances, and this difference leads us to expect 3. modification in the functions, instead of authorizing us to infer that the same office is executed in exactly the same manner in both cases. If we met with animals in whom the cystic duct opened into the small intestines separately from the hepatic, shall we therefore infer that the human gall bladder is not a receptacle for the hepatic bile?"

The prostate, of which a brief mention has already been made, in shape and size somewhat resembles a chesnut. It is situated below and behind the bladder, and above and in front of the rectum. The base inclines upwards and backwards, the apex pointing downwards and forwards. A notch in the middle of the base divides the prostate into two lateral tubes, immediately above which are the lowest parts of the deferent vessels and seminal vesicles, the ducts of which begin to perforate the gland in the middle of the notch, and then pass into the under part of the urethra, where it is surrounded by the substance of the gland. The neck of the bladder is surrounded by the prostate, as is also the commencement of the urethra, which thence obtains the name of the prostatic portion.





The gland is connected with the symphysis pubis and its descending rami by a strong fascia, and by planes of muscular fibres, which serve to support it, and by pressing on it during their contraction, aid in passing the secreted fluid from it into the urethra. Its substance is firm and compact, and when cut into gives the sensation of dividing cartilage. It is whiter in its substance than that of any other gland.

Behind the commencement of the urethra, between the passage of the ducts from the deferent vessels and the seminal vesicles, there is a portion of the prostate which is connected with both the lateral lobes; this portion is occasionally called the third lobe of the prostate. When the gland becomes enlarged from disease, this part presses upwards towards the cavity of the bladder, immediately behind the commencement of the urethra, and occasionally bends over that opening, acting as a sort of valve to prevent the expulsion of the urine.

The prostate is supplied with blood by branches from the internal pudic; they are comparatively few in number. Its veins and absorbents are numerous, and empty themselves into those which are connected with the bladder. The nerves of the prostate are branches from the intercostal plexus, which unite with others from the fourth and fifth sacral nerves.

The secreting structure approaches to that of the conglomerate glands, and consists of minute cells, from which small ducts arise and unite with each other, so as to form several vessels which terminate by separate orifices by the side of the caput gallinaginis. The fluid which is secreted is of a white or rather of a cream colour; in the dead body it is rather darker in colour; it is viscid, and has a slightly salt taste. When the passage of the urethra through the gland is slit open from before, and the substance of the gland is squeezed, this fluid may be seen to issue from- several pores in the under surface of the canal. Its use seems to be to lubricate the surface of the urethra, along which the semen is to pass. It is thrown out in considerable quantity, when the parts are in a state fit for immediate copulation; much of it then unites with the seminal fluid, and is discharged with that fluid when emission takes place.





The fluid of the prostate, like that of the seminal vesicles, is not absolutely necessary for the purposes of generation, in all animals which possess testicles; for although the gland is found in man, and the tribes of the simise, the lion, dog, etc., it is not present in the bull, the buck, and ram, and goat, and most probably in all ruminating animals. In these latter the coats of the seminal vesicles are thicker and more glandular than in those animals who have prostates. Hunter is therefore of opinion that the seminal vesicles answer nearly the same purpose as the prostate. Both the gland and the vesicles are wanting in birds and amphibious animals, and in fish which have testicles, as the ray kind. The prostate is said to be double in the elephant, camel, horse, and some other animals.

The semen is evacuated into that part of the urethra which is encompassed with the excretory ducts of the prostate gland, which discharges its secretion by twentyfour small orifices into the urethra, at the time when the semen is ejected; six of these excretory orifices being placed before the three apertures through which the seed is emitted, six of them behind those apertures, and six on each side. Hence the seed is never evacuated, but when the liquor of the prostate gland goes before, and follows after. It is obvious, therefore, how powerfully it must conduce to health, to have the secretion of this gland in a sound and pure state, as it is so intimately connected with the finest functions in the animal economy. The seed and secretion of the prostate gland are intimately mixed together in the urethra, and the latter is occasionally absorbed into the seminal vesicles themselves; for these vesicles and prostate gland are encompassed by the same muscular membrane. The humour, formed by the prostate gland, when in a sound and healthy state, is mild or balsamic, somewhat oily and white; but when it becomes diseased, it has the appearance of putrid matter from an ulcer, although no ulcer on those parts may exist. It is most plentifully secreted in good health, and its action continues after the testicles have been taken away, but it is not then in the least prolific; hence it seems intended, by nature, to be a vehicle to dilute, nourish, and convey the thick and ash-coloured concocted semen.





We have sometimes seen, in the most healthy men who have long abstained from venery, a copious running of the humour of this gland, from its being in a relaxed state, during which the semen will be emitted by the slightest effort, and from ideas of the mind, especially during sleep; which has often proved the cause of an atrophy, or consumption, when effectual aid has not been procured. The sooner the patient gets this relaxed state of the gland restored the better. We have sometimes been consulted where surgeons had been treating the patient as if this humour from the prostate gland was venereal. Errors of this kind have done great mischief. This humour flows from the prostate gland only, and it distils slowly without any ejaculation, contrary to the semen, from which it differs. Hence we observe, that this humour is not wanting in eunuchs, when they have an erection; and the same liquor sometimes distils from geldings when they strive to leap.

This secretion, which appears like semen in castrated animals, is absolutely unprolific, and destitute of every virtue for procreation. But although it does not contain any prolific virtue, yet good semen is not formed when those parts are corroded; so that great caution should be observed, by all those entering the marriage state, to be well assured that this humour of the prostate gland is in a sound and healthy state; for various evils may arise in consequence, and especially sterility. Many a fine estate has been deprived of an heir, as well as titles made extinct, from that cause, the true condition of things, perhaps, having never been discovered.





Healthy men continually separate semen from the blood, which being retained and inspissated, like the white of an egg or starch, would be almost immoveable, if it were not for the more thin juice of the prostate gland, when in a sound state, which mixes with it and serves to lubricate the urethra almost like an oil. Besides this, as the animalcule must stay a long time, perhaps, before it arrives in the uterus or womb, it seems necessary for it to be provided with a suitable aliment; for, unless nature nourished the animalcule, when formed, it would certainly perish or become extinct: and this nutritious liquor is that of the prostate gland, which in some animals is larger than are the testicles themselves.

Cowper's glands, which are situate between the bulb of the urethra and the membranous portion, are about the size of two small garden peas. They open into the canal by two small ducts, and appear to secrete a mucus which serves to lubricate the urethra. They vary much in size and consistence, and occasionally are not to be found.

The urethra, a membranous canal extending from the neck of the bladder to the end of the penis or yard, is divided into the prostatic, membranous, bulbous, and pendulous portions. Its coats are the same as those of the bladder; of which it is apparently a prolongation. The first or prostatic portion, commencing immediately from the neck of the bladder, is surrounded by the prostate, which it enters on the upper and anterior surface, a little more forwards than the notch at the base, and proceeds in a slightly incurvated direction onwards towards the pubes. On the under part of its internal surface, there is found a prominent projecting body, called the caput gallinaginis or verumontanum, on the sides of which the common ducts of the deferent vessels and seminal vesicles open into the canal, as also the ducts of the prostate.

The portion of the urethra between the prostatic and bulbous portions, is called the membranous, and the reason that has been alleged for this is, because its circumference is less than that of any other part of the canal. Its length is generally about an inch, when the penis is in a state of erection; when otherwise, it is somewhat less. It is cylindrical in form for about half its length. The urethra soon after takes the name bulbous, when it meets with the pendulous portion of the bulb, the substance of which however it does not enter until it reaches the arch of the pubes. At this part it is attached to the symphysis by muscular fibres. These muscles are influential in the expulsion of the semen. The urethra at this part enlarges somewhat at its under part, forming a kind of sinus, in which it has been supposed the semen may accumulate, until a sufficient quantity has been collected. The canal afterwards bends forwards and is surrounded by the spongy bodies, through its course along the under surface of the penis.





The whole of the internal surface of the urethra is abundantly supplied with mucus to defend it from the acrimony of the urine. It is secreted partly by vessels which form small projections on the inner surface of the canal, and partly by glandular structures situated at the bottom and sides of the very numerous lacunas or depressions dispersed over every part of the internal membrane, the openings of which are directed towards the termination of the urethra, so that the mucus is pressed out of their cavities by the urine as it flows from the bladder. These lacunae vary much in size, the largest being found in greatest numbers on the upper surface.

The urethra is very vascular, and possesses a certain degree of elasticity. Its membranes are very thin, and almost transparent and without fibres, so that in itself it does not possess the power of muscular contraction and relaxation. It is however provided with muscles, the action of which i» to assist the expulsion of the urine, and also of the seed during copulation. The membranous portion is surrounded by a congeries of veins, which communicate freely with each other, and terminate in the veins of the bladder. They are also connected with the corpus spongiosum. Its length is generally about twelve inches, but it varies much in different individuals.

The penis consists of the cavernous bodies, (corpora cavernosa) and of the spongy body (corpus spongiosum) the latter terminating in the gland or glans. These are enveloped in a loose folding of common integuments.





The cavernous bodies commence by two bodies called the crura, one on each side of the ischia; they unite below and in front of the arch of the pubis, and constitute the upper part of the penis, in the upper groove there being a large vein, two arteries, nerves, and absorbents, and in the lower, the spongy body surrounding the urethra.

The corpus spongiosum begins at the bulb in the form of an oblong swelling of a pyriform shape. It is incurvated forward, gradually becoming narrower, until it reaches the groove on the under part of the cavernous bodies; it then becomes cylindrical in shape, until it assumes a conical form when terminating in the glans penis. According to some anatomists it consists simply of a congeries of veins freely communicating with each other, while in the opinion of others it consists of cells formed and divided by a trellis work from each other, similar in structure to the cavernous bodies, but on a less scale and more regular.

The convex conical surface of the gland is covered by a fine membrane, in colour resembling the red part of the lips. At its base or corona there are rows of projecting papillae which secrete a sebaceou matter having a peculiar smell. The gland, which possesses exquisite sensibility, is protected by the loose covering called the prepuce or foreskin, which is tied to the penis immediately below the orifice of the urethra, by the band called the fraenum : this limits the motion of the prepuce and tends to keep it in its proper place.

The spongy substance of the urethra, which forms the glans penis, is covered externally with an exceeding thin membrane or cuticle, under which are placed the very sensible nervous papillas, which are the chief seat and cause of pleasure and pain in this part. We may now understand why many, in the venereal act, have not the glans distended, though the whole penis is, at the same time, turgid; because the glans belong entirely to the cavernous body of the urethra; and if that body be paralytic or weakened from any preceding or existing cause, which we have known often to proceed from irregular practices; in all those people where the spongy body of the urethra is not distended, impotence will arise, which if not perfectly understood, cannot be cured by any physician.





Whereas, in healthy men, when these organs are in due tone, during the orgasmus veneris, or the moment before the semen is ejected, the glans and whole cavernous body of the urethra are extremely turgid, so as to be ready to burst; but soon after a kind of convulsive motion follows, and the semen is discharged with a slight loss of strength for a little time throughout the whole body, which soon recovers its usual vigour.

During coition the corpus spongiosum and glans penis are rendered turgid by the blood filling their vascular structure, and the whole canal of the urethra is lengthened, but made more narrow and straight. The seed is gradually deposited in the sinus of the bulb; the glans being placed at the other extremity of the corpus spongiosum, and endowed with a peculiar sensibility, when a sufficient quantity of semen is collected, excites the muscles covering the bulb to action, and the contraction of the fibres taking place, the semen is propelled rapidly along the canal; the blood in the bulb is at the same time pressed forwards, but requiring a greater impulse, it forms an undulatory wave behind the semen, narrowing the urethra, and urging on the semen with increased force.

The corpora cavernosa are covered by a white elastic ligament of some thickness, and not very vascular, and are separated by a perforated septum, which allows the blood contained in the cellular structure to pass readily through its openings from one to another. They consist of numerous cells of very irregular size and shape, bounded by a net-like membranous substance which allows of as ready a communication between the cavities as does the septum. The cells of the corpora cavernosa have been thought to be more or less muscular, and it is said that in the horse they are evidently so. These bodies are supplied with blood by branches from the pudic, which sub-divides into small vessels, and are distributed everywhere throughout their structure.





When the passion of desire does not exist, the blood is not poured out into the cells, but returns by the veins as usual, and the penis remains flaccid; but when a person is under the influence of particular impressions which excite the nerves of these parts, the minute arterial branches which before had their orifices closed, have their action suddenly increased, and pour from their open mouths the blood into these cells, so as to distend them, of course overcoming the elastic power that under ordinary circumstances keeps them collapsed. In this way the penis is rendered fit to convey the semen to the female organs of generation. The erection of the penis is greatly aided by the action of certain muscles called the erectors of the penis.

The great vein of the penis is formed by branches from the gland, sides of the corpus spongiosum, and common integuments, runs along the back of the penis in the upper groove to its root, where it divides into two vessels which pass under the arch of the pubes, receive other veins from the prostate and bladder, and empty themselves into the internal iliac. The absorbents of the penis are very numerous, and terminate in the glands of the groin. The nerves are derived from the lumbar and sacral nerves, and from the inferior mesenteric plexus.

This chapter will be most appropriately terminated by some observations on puberty, and the changes it effects in the system.

The approach of puberty induces marked changes in the general system of man, as well as in the local organs which are subservient to generation. The growth of hair on the chin, upper lip, and sides of the face, and on the pubes, the peculiar alteration of the voice, the greater firmness of muscle, the extraordinary change in the passions and feelings, together with the great increase in the size of the penis and testicles, shew the advent of a peculiar change in the system, by which it is adapted for the propagation of the species. The desire for connexion with the female, implanted in man by nature for a wise purpose,

E





becomes developed after the period of puberty, and the organs by which the act is performed, gradually assume their full vigor and dimensions.

The age at which the peculiar changes in the organism called puberty takes place varies in different climates and in different constitutions. It is also influenced by the mode of life and circumstances of the individual. The period of puberty occurs earlier in warm than in cold climates; in temperate countries, it takes place from the fourteenth to the seventeenth year; the passions of youths living in large cities and towns are however excited earlier than are those of the agricultural population, on account of the greater sources of temptation to which they are exposed.

In those animals which are not endowed with reason to guide their actions, the desire for copulation occurs periodically, and in some the testicles increase in size until the season of procreation is over, and then decrease, and continue small, until the commencement of the next season. Evidence of this may be readily found in the testicles of the cock-sparrow, which progressively increase in size from January till the end of April, when the love season of these birds usually terminates. The increase and diminution of these organs however do not take place in birds only, but has been discovered in many other animals, more especially in the land-mouse and mole.

There are several reasons which might be alleged for the existence of a periodical desire for copulation among animals—were it otherwise, as the passion for sexual intercourse is very powerful, and animals do not possess the light of reason so as to be enabled to restrain or subdue their passions, it is probable that from its excessive indulgence, all their other habits might be lost, and even the necessity of providing for their present and future wants might be forgotten; besides which in those animals which are very fruitful, and which do not long carry their young, their number would be in a short time exceedingly great, far beyond the means of support that nature has provided for them. Another reason might be alleged, that were domestic animals always in heat, they would be of comparatively little service to man, while the flesh of wild ones would be too coarse and rank, and altogether unfit for the purposes of nourishment.





The period of the year during which the desire for copulation principally exists in animals is that of spring —few experience any sexual desire during the winter, except the frog, wolf, and fox; the severity of the cold seems to destroy, at least for the time, all such feelings. On the other hand, in climates where the summer is very hot, the genital organs of animals then become so much relaxed in tone, as to render them unfit for the proper performance of the necessary act.

The case is however somewhat different in domestic animals; the passion is less periodical, the secretion of semen not being arrested by cold, to which they are much less exposed, and the circumstances in which they are placed being altogether different.

In man the desire for procreation arises at puberty, and may and can be indulged in, if health and the requisite powers continue, at all times and seasons of the year. Being endowed by nature with the high, the exalted function of reason, he is left a free agent, having the full power to use or abuse his capabilities, with the consciousness that if he do abuse the functions with which he is gifted, he must abide the penalty. Man is not affected by changes of temperature as are the wild animals, either as respects excessive heat or intense cold, and consequently the human testicles are generally the same in dimensions after puberty throughout the year.

The desire for sexual intercourse in man begins after puberty, and is consentaneous with the secretion of semen or seed by the testicles. It is preposterous to say it depends on the occurrence of that secretion, as both the passion for copulation and the secretion of semen are but indications of the great change which takes place in the system at that epoch. It does not however exist before the testicles begin to enlarge in size, and perform their proper function, and it is said, but untruly, to be lost when the operation of castration has been performed. Those eunuchs only are not influenced by the desire for procreation who were deprived of the organs of generation prior to puberty; those who were castrated subsequent to that event, still entertain the desire for intercourse, although in a less degree than men who have all their organs entire. Desire is more languid in advanced age than during the period of the adult life; the seed is then more sparingly secreted, and indeed all the functions of the system are performed in a less energetic manner, although, as will soon be shown, old men are not in every instance deprived of the power of generation. Desire is also very moderate in persons who have small organs, and occasionally it is altogether absent. Spermatozoa have been discovered in the testicles of men upwards of seventy years of age, and on one occasion in the organs of a tailor, who died as the age of eighty-seven. There are even circumstances on record of persons retaining the procreative faculty to the age of one hundred years; but in these cases, as in the well-known instance of old Parr, the general bodily powers were also preserved in an extraordinary degree.





In speaking of this function, and of its exercise, Dr. Carpenter in his Principles of Human Physiology observes,—' To the use of the sexual organs for the continuance of his race, man is prompted by a powerful instinctive desire, which he shares with the lower animals. This instinct is excited by sensations; and these may either originate in the sexual organs themselves, or may be excited through the organs of special sensation. Thus in man it is most powerfully aroused by impressions conveyed through the sight or touch i in many other animals the auditory and olfactory organs communicate impressions which have an equal power; and it is not improbable that in certain morbidly excited states of feeling, the same may be the case in ourselves. That local impressions have also very powerful effect in exciting sexual desire must have been within the experience of almost every one; the fact is most remarkable however in cases of satyriasis. This disease is generally found to be connected with some obvious cause of irritation of the generative system, such as pruritus, active congestion, etc. The instinct (for sexual intercourse) when once aroused, (even though very obscurely felt,) acts upon the mental faculties and moral feelings, and thus becomes the source, though almost unconsciously so to the individual, of the tendency to form that kind of attachment towards one of the opposite sex, which is known as love. This tendency cannot be regarded as a simple passion or emotion, since it is the result of the combined operations of the reason, the imagination, and the moral feelings; and it is in the engraftment (so to speak) of the psychical attachment upon mere corporeal instinct that a difference exists between the sexual relations of man and those of the lower animals.'





EXPLANATION OF THE PLATES.



FRONTISPIECE—a front view of the contents of tie abdomen and pelvis, and of the organs of generation. A A, the kidneys B B, the renal capsules. c c c c, the renal arteries and veins. D, the great arlt-ry or aorta. X, the great cava vein. T, the spermatic artery. & G, the spermatic veins. Ii Ii. the ureters. I I, the spermatic cords. K, the rectum. L, the bladder. M, the penis. N, the gland of the penis. o, the orifice of the penis. T, the testicle, a, the vas deferens. B, the scrotum.



PLATE 1st

This plate offers a general side view of the pelvis, and of its contents.

A, is the bladder, in a state of distension, with its blood vessels ramifying on it.

B, the ureter, arising from the pelvis of the kidney, ana passing downwards and slightly inwards to the bladder, which it enter* mt the lower and back part, ajter crossing over the vas deferens.

c, the seminal vesicle.

D, the prostate, embracing the neck of the bladder, and surrounding the prostatic part of the urethra.

E, the rectum, or lower bowel, situated immediately behind the bladder, from which it is separated by loose cellular tissue, and a partial Jold of the peritoneum.

F, the penis, represented in a state of partial erection, with an instrument passedi in order the better to display

a. the urethra, which, continuous with, and arising from the neck of the bladder, passes out of the pelvis under the arch of the pubes, and runs along the under groove in the penis, terminating at the giant.

a, the spermatic cord passing out of the scrotum, through the abdominal rings and inguinal canal (which are not represented in the plate, the walls ol the abdomen having been removed, the better to display the situation of its contents J and then along the side of the bladder, until the cord becomes separated, the arteries, veins, and nerves taking one course, while the vas deferens 1, plunges into the pelvis, terminating in the common duct, which it forms by uniting with the seminal vesicles.





PLATE 2nd.—Figure 1st.

A, the spermatic cord, consisting of the artery, veins, and nerves. B, the testicle, representing also the origin of the deferent lube from the epididymis.

c, the deferent tube, taking its course to join the seminal vesicle.

D, the seminal vesicle.

E, the bladder. r, the ureter.



PLATE 2nd.—Figure 2nd.

A, the deferent tube, magnified.

B, the same tube, laid open.

c, the seminal vesicle, shewing its cellular arrangement.

D, the same laid open.



PLATE 3rd.—Figure 1st.

A A, the vasa deferentia, conveying the semen from the testicle to the urethra.

B B, the seminal vesicles, representing their convoluted appearance.

c c, the arteries supplying these parts with blood.

D, openings of the vasa deferentia in the prostatic portion of the urethra.

E E, the lateral tubes of the prostate.

r F, the prostatic portion of the urethra laid open, shewing the caput gallinaginis, or verumontanum.



Figure 2nd.

k, the bladder.

B, the neck or cervix of the bladder.

c c, the ureters.

D D, the vasa deferentia.

E E, the seminal vesicles.

F, the anterior portion of the prostate,

o, the membranous portion of the urethra.

H, the erector muscles of the penis.

11, the cavernous bodies of the penis.

x K, the arteries of the penis.



i, the great vein, with the arteries and nerves running in the upper groove of the penis. M M, nerve of the penis. V, orifice of the urethra. 0, gland of the penis, r, the prepuce or foreskin.





ONANISM AND ITS CONSEQUENCES.



The practice of the solitary vice, onanism, manustupration or masturbation has been condemned by all writers, whether medical men, philosophers, or divines, from the earliest ages of mankind. One of its names, onanism, is derived from the saddening example of Onan the second son of Judah, who was struck dead by his Creator for the commission of this heinous sin. In other places in Scripture, allusions are made to this dangerous practice, and fearful denunciations are announced against those who are guilty—denunciations which are fully carried out in the wretchedness of health both of body and mind, which follow its commission. Man cannot err against the dictates of nature, without paying a severe penalty for his lapse sooner or later. The penalty exacted for onanism is one of the most serious and awful nature. It involves a gradual exhaustion of the powers of mind and body, and an early death, attended with every suffering that man can endure. Every function of the system becomes disordered and diseased; and at last the wretched victim of error perishes in a state of misery too fearful to contemplate.

The exhaustion of the system, caused by excessive evacuations of any kind, is constantly shewn by the results of many of the diseases to which flesh is heir. Of all these there is not one which exerts so malificent an influence on the frame, as excessive discharge of the seminal fluid, whether it be poured forth in a healthy condition, or whether it be diseased, thin and watery, in consequence of the habitual practice of one of the most dangerous habits man can acquire. Sexual intercourse if carried to excess, is markedly injurious; daily experience is confirmatory of the assertion, but the injury resulting from self-pollution so far exceeds it in magnitude, as scarcely to admit of a comparison between their respective consequences. It is therefore still more to be dreaded in its final action than sexual intercourse.





This fact admits of ready explanation. Sexual intercourse, even when carried to such an extent as to be absolutely immoderate, cannot however be pursued without occasional periods of cessation,—lasting for a lapse of time far beyond that which occurs in the manipulations of the masturbator. Repeated connexion with women cannot be carried out so frequently, as the man guilty of self-pollution can pursue his degrading and destructive practices, nor is it attended when it does take place, with the same amount of sexual and general excitement. The nervous energy is consequently less depressed, and the powers of life rally sooner. If then we take in account these several facts, that sexual intercourse is not repeated so frequently, nor so soon after the previous act, that it is not attended with the same amount of general excitement and consequently the nervous system is more rapidly restored, and less permanently injured, than by the act of onanism, the difference in their respective influences on the system will be readily understood and generally admitted.

From a knowledge of these facts, it appears evident, that those individuals who suffer themselves to be governed by passion rather than by reason, and whose vivid imagination leads them to the indulgence of censual habits earlier than Nature intended, anticipate the ability of manhood ere its empire is established; thus demolishing the delicate groundwork cf physical energy, and soliciting a manhood of disgraceful imbecility. This maniacal act of delusion not only deprives the system of its salutary and essential support, but abo obstructs the power of seminal excitement; and, by stimulating the organs to transier.i vigour, brings, ere middle life succeeds the summer of manhood, ail the sensible infirmities and foibles of age; producing in its impetuous current, such an assemblage of morbid irritation, that even on trivia; oacasicr.s its excitement is of a high and inflammable character, and its endurance beyond the



r





power of reason to sustain: and when at last the lucid interval breaks through the dark clouds, what is the retrospect? what lights upon the mind's eye ?—all that is opposed to every honourable and honest feeling! because the more that reflection is concentrated on this surreptitious act, the more derogatory to every thing manly does this singular and extraordinary deviation from the dictates of nature appear.

By the repeated excitement of the nervous system, produced by the practice of this unnatural and self-destroying passion, the constitution is left in a deplorable state of health, and that neivous condition kept up, which places the individual in a state of anxiety and misery for the remainder of his existence,—a kind of contingency, which it is difficult for language adequately to describe; he vegetates, but lives not: hence the consequences arising out of the ashes of this dangerous phoenix are not confined to its pure physical result, but extend to moral ones, leading the excited deviating mind into a fertile field of seductive error—into a gradual and fatal degradation of manhood—into a pernicious, disgraceful, and ultimately almost involuntary application of those inherent rights which nature wisely instituted for the preservation of her species. When once the destructive practice is established, the barrier of intellectual control falls; for the mind, that changling of social cultivated man, by a singular adjunction, becomes not the corrector, but the exciter and co-operator in defiance of culture, moral feeling, moral obligation, and religious impressions: thus the man, who, at the advent of youth and genius was endowed with gaiety and sociality, becomes, ere twenty-five summers have shed their lustre on him, a misanthrope, and a nadirpoint of discontent! What moral region does that man live in? what moral feeling does he cherish, that would not unite all the energies of his nature to stem the torrent of so fatal a cataract 1 Is it nothing to give license and tacit approbation to a weakness and predilection that break through all the barriers of nature, and give to the individual a callous insensibility, foreign to the native texture of his heart, and darkens all the brilliant and enthusiastic prospects of the future? Is it nothing to surrender up all the refined and manly enjoyments of social and conjugal intercourse, and substitute in their places a deep and barren misery? Is it nothing to light the gloomy torch that guides, by slow and melancholy steps to the sepulchre of manhood, in the gay and fascinating spring-time of youth and ardent desire; when the brilliant fire of passion, genius, and sentiment, ought to electrify the whole frame? Is it nothing to raise a host of sensations, of the most depressing nature, all hostile to the natural ardency of youthful passions?





To begin the career of manhood by the abuse of Nature's functions, and that too, when the system has not completed the powers of its organization, and abounds with energy and passion, is contrary to all the rules by which health and happiness may be attained; exclusively absorbed by this fatal passion, all the powers of mind and body are wasted in illusion, and an age of care and anxiety follows, ere the full period of manhood has been reached; as it keeps the individual in a state of perpetual effervescence, it becomes the worst of all delusions; and, under the varied forms of its peculiar excitement, it produces morbid sensibility, erotic imagination, and their consequent results—hypochondriasis hysteria, indigestion, &c.—which, on their first approach, are considered of too light a character to merit attention: and thus time passes on till the whole system is involved in relative or positive disease. That the dangerous consequences of those delusive acts are not early felt, does not prove they never will in the lapse of time: and if, in some iron constitutions, it does not produce any physical consequences, it still leaves upon the mind a painful impression, and causes doubt, anxiety, and a marked dissatisfaction with the conditions upon which the tenure of life is held: in fact, it has no counterbalancing advantage, no redeeming quality; it is equally injurious to physical and moral purity; and however modified by strength of constitution or of mind, ought not to be regarded with any thing approaching to indifference; it is a state too dangerous, indeed, to be regarded with indifference; and we hesitate not to say, that, in its mischievous progress, it is the herald of every baneful vice: and when the individual, overwhelmed with disgrace, contempt, and odium, can no longer sustain the excitement, the mind, revolting against an existence that assimilates to it nothing but unhappy aberrations, seeks peace from its errors in suicide: it gradually diminishes the sensibility of the organs; and generally produces emaciation, which ends either in tabes or atrophy, for sooner or later, it weakens the power of digestion: and the bile, the gastric and pancreatic juices, all become vitiated. In some habits a few weeks' indulgence in this infatuated propensity will induce these diseases, either by sympathy or connection; and where a predisposition to insanity exists, derangement follows. It not only occasions impotency, by producing a paralysis of the muscles concerned in sexual energy, but it destroys the excitement itself by which the act is induced, and the feelings which lead to it are maintained.





This crime constitutes in itself an abandonment of the essential position that man should occupy in society. Look at it indeed under any aspect in which it can be regarded, and the plainest facts demonstrate its pernicious tendency. Appeal to nature; ask her the character of this horrid act; and in the pure, calm, reflecting language of simplicity and truth, she will reply, that the deed is only in unison with every thing that is injurious to physical, intellectual, and moral influences; draining the constitution of its vigour and vitality, and destroying every manly and virtuous feeling! It is a vampire feeding on the life-blood of its victims: it renders them for ever ambiguous beings, in the scale of manhood: they present the complication of apparent energy without the corresponding re-action of animal vitality.

By this practice a constant irritation is kept up in the system, which by its perpetual influence, renders the delicate fibres of those organs incapable of the act of coition: for, by its repetition, the organs of generation are so familiarized with the dictates of the imagination, that they are more readily excited into action, and that too imperfectly, by this morbid and vitiated influence, than by the effects of their natural stimuli; it produces that debility which must ever result from excessive action of any organ, and that general exhaustion of the nervous system which is the morbid consequence of power unnaturally exerted beyond its limits. Thus the foundation of an aversion to Paphian pleasures is laid, and nocturnal emissions soon follow. Some slight local irritation of the parts agitates the first link of that chain of ideas which has been artificially associated with the action of these organs; uninterrupted by external impressions, the chain continues; and the organs perform their functions in compliance with this excitement, and that too frequently, at all hours of the day and night, and apparently from the most trivial cause. These repetitions are more than the human frame can bear, and they produce that incapacity for erection in the male, which lays the foundation of impotence, and which causes in the female an aversion to sexual intercourse. The mind, by becoming interested in the performance of this act, and by the exhaustion of the nervous energy which its frequent performance induces, becomes debilitated; silently tortured by the bitterest agonies of remorse, the wretched victim of this foul propensity suffers from a general lassitude of the nervous action, in which the whole system participates, but more particularly the organs of digestion; for such is the sympathy of these parts with the act of impression, that all the physical and moral sensibilities are directed to them, as to one common focus. A stronger illustration of this fact cannot be met with than in Dr. Darwin's Zoonomia, where, treating of that hallucination of mind produced by the predominance of one particular impression, he mentions the circumstance of a man who shot himself, leaving upon the table a slip of paper containing these words only, '/ am impotent, and not fit to live.'





Returning to the immediate object of our investigation, let us enquire, in the first place, if there be no moral turpitude attached to an act that counteracts the end for which we were designed? secondly, has the constant repetition of this act no effect on the animal mechanism? thirdly, will not the seminal vessels, by being emptied too frequently and too rapidly,be filled with greater abundance of fluid, but of a less healthy and natural character 1 Agreeably to the laws of the animal economy, as this elaborate secretion is increased in quantity, all the other secretions must be impoverished; this effect therefore does not confine its operation to muscular energy alone, but causes its influence to be felt also by the intellectual powers. Galen says, that "every pore is full of semen with those who refrain from sexual intercourse; that it has excellent virtues, and very speedily communicates some of its power and energy to all parts of the body." "Nature," says an elegant writer, "has given us hunger for the preservation of the individual, and lust for the support of the species :" reasonable creatures correct their incentives, and make them conducive to the purposes of friendship and society, by placing them in subjection to moral sentiment and the influences of the intellect. In fact, this practice not only injures the body, but the mind also and that at a period when it is full of genius and power: even when the passions are developing themselves in the zenith and energy of their action, its influence is felt throughout the whole fabric, acting with fearful energy on the mental faculties, and rendering the individual unqualified for the ordinary and necessary avocations of social life: reducing him to a state of childish imbecility and premature decrepitude, and bringing on all the habitudes of premature age, ere the middle of life has arrived: he carries with him the form and aspect of other men, but without the vigour and energy of that season which his early youth bade him hope to attain. Buffon observes: "How many men cease to be men, or, at least, cease to enjoy manhood, at thirty? How many at eighteen receive the impression of the seeds of a disgraceful disease itself, which it is impossible afterwards to eradicate? For an abuse of the sexual impulse greatly accelerates old age: and unfortunately, as the season of life advances, to its imbecility are added all the errors that approximate to youthful sensuality; thus the desire of venery is either transient and insufficient, or totally annihilated, producing a debility little short of death. In the generative system, it forces and weakens the vessels of these organs to such a baneful extent, that when the luxuriance of youthful passions prompts to the lively





intercourse of sexual bliss, they feel, they burn, with all the ardour of endearing blandishments, yet want the energy and capabilities necessary for their gratification. 'To condemn and expose a sin so displeasing to God —so detrimental to mankind—and so injurious to ourselves, requires no other way of arguing than that which is agreeable to the plainest truth, and can stand the test of the severest reason; for there is not a place either in the Old or New Testament, where the lust of the flesh, or the abomination of Sodom are condemned, but this sin is mentioned amongst others, and there is little doubt but those who are guilty of it are comprehended among the Abominable.

But if it had not been revealed to us that God is highly offended at all manner of uncleanliness, when we reflect on the end of marriage, in all countries and in all societies, and the manner after which God has ordained our species should be continued, natural religion and our own reason would of themselves instruct us, that to destroy that end must be very offensive to God; and we cannot refrain from quoting the words of a learned divine, while speaking of this shameful and disgusting practice, "The crime in itself," says he, "is monstrous and unnatural—in its practice filthy and odious to extremity—its guilt is crying and its consequences ruinous—it destroys conjugal affection—prevents natural inclination—and tends to extinguish the hopes of posterity."

We shall not here meddle with the causes of uncleanliness in general, as these are sufficiently treated of in most books of devotion and practical divinity, so we refer our readers to them, and design only to speak of those peculiar causes which belong to this sin, and hardly any other. The first cause is Ignorance of the enormity of the crime.—There are thousands among the youths of both sexes, ingenious, docile, diligent, and tractable, who, either by the example of their intimates, through their own wantonness, or by being idle and alone, and some again by mere accident, have learned to pollute themselves after this manner, who would have abhorred the thought had they understood the nature of the sin, and been acquainted with the heinousness of the crime. The second is the Secrecy with which self-pollution may be committed; all other actions of uncleanliness must have a witness— this needs none. The third and last cause we shall allege is Impurity; though the laws against adultery are in many places very remiss or ill executed, yet the dread of them keeps the fearful in awe. The punishment for Unnatural Impurities committed with others is Capital, whereas, in self-pollution neither the Cautious or the Covetous imagine they have anything to fear. What a strange thing it is, therefore, that a man should show bashfulness and the utmost cowardice to his fellow creature, (even should that fellow creature be the most impotent wretch,) and that he should behave with gigantic boldness and impudence to the Almighty Creator of heaven and earth. What comfort must a man have in reflecting on the past actions of his life, who hardly coming to half the age he might reasonably have expected to have arrived at, finds himself enervated by the practice of self-pollution, his spirits sunk, his body wasted, and his strength decayed, and in continual danger of being forced to resign his impure breath upon the least inclemency of the season, or any other trifling accident? Many individuals scarcely turned of forty years of age, and sometimes even earlier, who have lived rather freely, are not unfrequently about that period of life, greatly changed in their powers of sexual intercourse. They may, indeed, in general health and personal appearance, be stout, and, for several years, not very sensible of the degeneration of their powers, but the frequency of their inclination for such duties gradually becomes much diminished, and that is a symptom which is at all times indicative of approaching impotence; for the inclination gradually and entirely ceasing, the power speedily follows, or rather both are lost together. In others, about the same time of life, the physical power ceases first, and the inclination continuing, often for many years after, they are obliged to gratify themselves in amusements which are the mere pantomine of amorous indulgences!—such individuals, being otherwise in tolerable health, are recoverable.





From actual observation, we are convinced, that all these different states owe their origin, and even their immediate existence to nearly the same cause, and may, in almost every instance, be removed by nearly similar treatment.

Hippocrates, the most ancient and just observer, has already described the ills that are occasioned by self-abuse, under the title of Tabes dorsalis: "This disorder arises from the spinal marrow; and those of a lascivious disposition are afflicted with it. They have no fever, and though they eat well they fall away and become consumptive. They feel as if a string or stitch descended from the head along the spinal marrow. Every time they go to stool, or have occasion to urine, they shed a great quantity of thin seminal liquor. They are incapable of procreation, and they frequently dream of the act of coition. Walking, particularly in rugged paths, puts them out of breath and weakens them; occasioning a heaviness in the head and noise in the ears, which are succeeded by a violent fever, (lypiria,) that terminates their days." In a further description of the disease, he also observes "that it is caused by a wasting of the marrow of the back-bone in an unnatural way;" by which doubtlessly he meant the sperm, or seminal liquor. "The patient," says he, "is free from fever, yet feels a kind of burning heat on some internal part: sometimes eats and digests well; and if you ask him with respect to his state, he tells you that he feels a cold running stream from the superior part of his body (the head we suppose) into the spine of his back, and when he discharges his urine or his excrement, there is sometimes an evacuation of liquid semen," "This man," continues the sage philosopher of Cos, "will be rendered incapable of propagating his species, or answering the purposes of the marriage bed, unless the healing art affords him relief."

"He is generally short-breathed, feels languid after rising in the morning, with weakness about his loins, and especially after much exercise, and his sleep does not afford him the wished-for refreshment. An intermitting dimness of sight sometimes attacks him, hie memory fails, and his spirits become dejected."





Hippocrates then farther observes, "that when this distemper continues for a length of time, it assumes various appearances in the constitution, and makes other stages under different characters; if not rightly understood it may end in an atrophy, or nervous consumption; or, perhaps, in phthisis, or consumption of the lungs, where the healing art, but too often, proves in vain."

There can be nothing more dreadful than the picture which Aetius has left us of the ills that are produced by too great a discharge of the semen. "Young people," says he, "have the air and appearance of old age; they become pale, effeminate, benumbed, lazy, base, stupid, and even imbecile; their bodies become bent, their legs are no longer able to carry them; they have an utter distaste for everything, are totally incapacitated, and may become paralytic." "The stomach is disordered," says Aetius, "all the body is weakened; paleness, bodily decay, and emaciation succeed, and the eyes sink into the head." These testimonies of the most respectable ancients are confirmed by innumerable modern writers. Sanctorius, who has examined with the greatest attention all the causes which influence the human body, has observed that it weakens the stomach, destroys digestion, obstructs that insensible perspiration, the irregularity of which produces the most fatal consequences, occasions the liver and kidneys to be overheated, causes a deposition of the stone in the latter, diminishes the natural heat, and usually occasions the loss of, or at least weakens, the sight. Lommius, in his beautiful commentaries upon the passages of Celsus, supports the testimony of the author, with his own just observations. "Frequent emissions of the seed relax, dry up, weaken, enervate, and produce a crowd of evils; apoplexies, lethargies, epilepsies, faintings, the loss of sight, tremors, palsy, spasms, and every species of the most racking gout."

The description which Tulpius, that celebrated physician of Amsterdam, has left us cannot be read without horror. "The spinal marrow does not only waste, but the body and mind both equally languish, and the man perishes a miserable victim." "Nothing," says that renowned physician, De Louvain, "weakens the stomach and abridges life so soon." Blanchard has been an eye-witness to a simple gonorrhoea, to consumptions, and dropsies which have flowed from this source.





When tabes dorsalis has existed for a length of time in the constitution, the frequent and involuntary discharges of the semen, from ideas arising in the mind during sleep, or by unnatural practices, the seminal vesicles become so relaxed and weakened, that they have not sufficient power to retain it. By its short continuance in the seminal vesicles, it has not time to become elaborated, nor to communicate that balsamic, sedative, and strengthening quality to the nerves of the human frame, which by nature it was intended to do. Almost as fast as it is secreted from the blood, the slightest stimulus in the mind, from external objects, causes it to run off by its own reservoirs into the urethra; and in course of time the natural secretion of the gland through which the semen passes becomes 'vitiated, till at last these organs become merely a common cistern or sink to carry off involuntarily the most precious humour of the human body. The secretion of the prostate gland in this disease, will sometimes run off, as well as the semen, with the urine, and sometimes when straining at stool; and it requires considerable experience to distinguish the one from the other. In particular stages of this disease, experience has taught us that the nervous system of some patients will become affected in a peculiar manner, according to the variety of constitutions and temperaments; besides, many foreign circumstances occasion a considerable difference in the manner in which the nervous systems of different individuals are attacked in consequence of this malady.

Many instances are not wanting, where an atrophy or nervous consumption has succeeded, and also phthisis or consumption of the lungs, which puts a period to life.

By way of distinction from other consumptions, this disease is termed tabes dorsalis, because the seat of the disease at its commencement is generally perceived to affect the patient about the loins, and the small of his back, the seminal functions being the chief seat of the disorder. In the beginning of this disease the body is sometimes costive, with symptoms of heat in some parts, whilst others are cold, and a lowness of spirits with melancholy generally attend; but whether these are real symptoms or not, must be ascertained by the experienced practitioner. When it is taken early, and rightly understood, it is not dangerous; but when it has existed for a length of time, the constitution will decay, and, as we have frequently observed, it is attended with peculiar circumstances, which differ from other consumptions; for, when the patient has discovered the cause of his malady, he despairs of a cure, while if rightly managed and properly understood it is impossible he should miscarry.





If the cause of the patient's sufferings has not been removed, the decay of the constitution makes a farther progress, and spreads far and wide. We know, from experience, that when any corrupted humour becomes , absorbed into the general circulation of the fluids, the blood and nervous aura will be more or less vitiated and impaired. A pain, with weakness, sometimes seizes the small of the back, and now and then a troublesome sensation seems to descend, by the backbone, upon the loins; the patient by degrees will sometimes grow chilly, and any air colder than ordinary pierces the spine. After the patient has suffered thus for some time, a languor seizes on the spirits; and this may happen to both sexes, for women are subject to this disease as well as men. Moving pains of the head will often take place, and wandering pains of the legs, arms, and joints, accompanied sometimes with a weakness of all the senses, whereupon all sensation becomes vitiated; the eyes suffer from clouds and mists that seem to fall before the sight and intercept the light; and the ears sometimes sing and tingle, as if something were breeding in their hollow cavities. Upon an involuntary emission of the semen, which will sometimes be frequent under this decay, the strength of the patient seems to come away with it; and there have been instances of bis lying like a log, unable





scarcely to turn himself; and if this discharge of the semen be very copious, cases have occurred where the patient has fainted away. If this disease continue for any considerable time unrelieved, many instances have happened in which the patient has been reduced to desperation, with melancholy reflections, anxieties, and dismal conflicts, so as to require every attention and care of the practitioner. A variety of other evils might also be brought forward.

Too great a dissipation of the animal spirits weakens the stomach, destroys the appetite; and nutrition having no longer a place, the motion of the heart is weakened, all the parts languish, and an epilepsy or palpitation of the heart to a most distressing degree succeed. Hoffman has seen the most fatal accidents. flow from a dissipation of the seed. "After frequent nocturnal pollutions," says he, "not only the powers are lost, the body falls away, and the face turns pale; but moreover the memory fails, a cold sensation seizes the limbs, the sight is clouded, and the voice becomes hoarse; all the body languishes by degrees; and disturbing dreams prevent sleep administering any relief."

An eloquent writer also remarks, that "all the intellectual functions participate in this derangement: the memory loses its retentive power; the ideas are connected with no solidity: caprice rather than reflection governs every action, and, in fact, partial insanity invades the whole system; while inward terror, restlessness, and constant anguish, are never absent from the hapless sufferer, if this state of system be long allowed to predominate." Such individuals generally become hypocondriacal or hysterical, with all the ills attendant on these tedious complaints: some are affected with coughs, slow fevers, and lingering consumptions: the most acute pains pervade different parts of the body; which frequently have been referred to imaginary sensibility, but which sensations, we contend, are actually present, and produce a change of organization equally as hostile to the mind as to the constitution, and which are called into action on the slightest impression. There are not only to be seen pimples on the face, which is a common symptom, but even blotches and carbuncles sometimes appear there, as well as on the nose, breast and thighs: and occasionally, fleshy excrescences arise on the forehead. Amid this mighty ravage of silent disease, the generative organs are also affected: the semen is evacuated on the slightest irritation, even on going to stool: numbers are affected with habitual gonorrhoea, which entirely destroys the energy and vigour of the constitution, the discharge assuming the appearance of that which flows from old ulcers in the legs: impotence more or less exists: the functions of the intestines are sometimes totally destroyed; and some individuals complain of costiveness, others of diarrhaea and piles, thus constituting a class of disease, calamitous indeed, which perhaps, at its first approach may arise without producing any organic alteration, but ultimately assists in nourishing those changes that become combined with the affections produced. We are of opinion that they not only occasion impotence in the one sex, and sterility in the other, but that they lay the foundation of those tedious discharges which sometimes assume the character of seminal, and at other times of mucal, gleets.





The Arabian physicians, who were the first to practise the art of healing, have handed down to us, in their writings, the reasons why a discharge of semen will weaken the body more than the loss of a large quantity of blood. There have also been some of the moderns who have calculated how much the body is weakened by a seminal emission; but all this seems to arise from a kind of epilepsy, or convulsion, which accompanies the emission, especially in the unnatural way, and not from the quantity of semen lost, provided the nerves are in a healthy state; for, if the individual be in sound health, his strength returns in a little time, even before a fresh supply of semen itfelf can be restored, providing the discharge of the seminal fluid be effected in the way nature has pointed out, and not in the manner which these pages are intended to reprobate in the strongest terms our language enables us to adopt.

A learned physician who wrote about thirty years since, in describing the wretched condition of those who have impaired their health and capabilities by masturbation, observes, "Like every other organ of the body, the seminal vessels have a certain round of action to perform, which, if undisturbed, they will continue to do through a whole course of long life. These actions will proceed with considerable regularity, even where sexual intercourse is altogether neglected; for the healthy secretion of semen, when it has proceeded to a certain extent, will naturally be thrown off without occasioning disease: but, like every other organ of the body, when subjected to continued extraordinary exertion, from whatever cause, their action is altered; they become diseased, and either cease to secrete healthy semen, become incapable of retaining it after it is secreted, or are entirely and irrecoverably rendered unfit for again resuming their office.





This irrecoverable state, however, is much less common than was once supposed. The disease is most frequently caused by habits altogether contrary to the laws of nature, and to habituate ourselves to such practices, by working up the imagination, and creating artificial desires, is always injurious; and the more delicate the vessels exposed to such practices, the more likely they are to be seriously injured. This observation is strictly applicable to the present complaint. Indeed, from the commencement of the unfortunate habit of self-pollution, which is the most frequent cause of this disease, there is seldom any desire for sexual intercourse; and although such desire should be felt, a repetition of these unmanly habits is preferred to natural connection. At length there is induced a great derangement in the digestive organs—a general lassitude, with a weariness, often approaching to pain, in the loins—the bowels become constipated, often in an alarming degree—the face pale, bloated, and cadaverous, and the body is generally flabby or emaciated, with coldness in the extremities. Then occur trembling hands, dim eyes, confused ringing in the ears, indistinct hearing, if not entire deafness, accompanied with frequent and violent head-ache. Drowsiness also exists, without the power to sleep, all attempts at which are interrupted by the most frightful dreams. Indeed the individual becomes terrified to go to bed, lest sudden death should be his fate; and, during the day, he is timid, fretful, terrified, and discontented; has violent palpitations of the heart, and, though he seems sensible of the cause of his distress, is unable to abandon his habits, particularly while in bed. Under such a state we often find instances of young men, who become delicate, without being affected with any particular complaint, and who are unhappy, but know not the cause. They become effeminate—a complete state of imbecility, both of body and mind at length ensues, and, in some, the haggard countenance but imperfectly proclaims the distraction of the mind. There cannot be a doubt that this. general depravity, and these its consequences, at length terminate the existence of thousands, who are supposed to die from very different causes. This is a general sketch of these symptoms; but we must examine them more particularly.





Young men, of a good natural constitution, enter upon that thoughtless part of their lives, and very often by the advice and example of their schoolfellows, commence improper practices, heedless of what is to be the dreadful result to a very great majority of them. If they reason at all, they calculate, that they will escape, however much others may have suffered, and they thus proceed upon plans, which are, in their own way of reasoning, of a stable nature. A ruined constitution is the consequence, and then they can give an advice which is also disregarded by others till too late. Such improper practices, sooner or later, according to the original vigour of constitution, subject the individual to a train of the most awful sufferings. One may be affected in a few months, another not perhaps for a year or two, but none entirely escape; they all at length precipitate themselves into an abyss which we should fail in attempting to describe. In some whose organs have arrived at that state of derangement which gives origin to such a complaint, the emission during connection is performed very variously. In the early stages, the emission is sometimes scarcely to be obtained, at least for a very great length of time: while in others, particularly in the advanced stages, the emission occurs inconceivably soon; indeed, some cannot at all perform the act of copulation before it has taken place; while others, from the particular morbid condition of the testicles, during which no secretion takes place, have no emission at all.





It has also frequently been observed that different persons were in some respects affected very differently. Certain wanderings of the imagination, for instance, during sleep, cause erections—the secretion of semen goes on—the relaxed seminal vessels are unable to retain it, and, by the very slightest occasional cause, an emission takes place. In some also, very gentle friction, such as is caused by moderate horse-back exercise, or by their clothes while walking, &c. or even an attempt to perform sexual intercourse, is instantly followed by an emission; while others, although during their dreams, they had from one to five or six emissions in one night, could use any kind of ordinary exercise without causing an effect of this kind; and whose various attempts, perhaps in the same night, to effect such an evacuation in the natural way, were quite ineffectual, even although the scene of action was often protracted, and the attempt stili persevered in for an incredible length of time.

Although these are the most common periods of the disease for such unpleasant occurrences to take place, yet this is often reversed.

This is one of the many proofs of the impossibility of applying general rules, too often had recourse to in considering diseases and their treatment, and not more particularly attending to the individual peculiarities which, often, in the most unaccountable manner, are to be found in the world. Thus while some propel the semen vigorously, even in advanced stages of the complaint, in others it comes off almost without the sufferer being aware of it.

Fleshy excrescences, and even abscesses sometimes break out about the anus, and at the same time there is often also felt a degree of irritation or itching about that part of the urethra where the seminal vessels open into it, which is generally attributed to the presence of strictures, to a disease of the bladder, or of the pros





tate gland; when they are merely the consequence of diseased action in the seminal vessels themselves, and are removeable by whatever restores them to their healthy condition. In more advanced stages there is often felt a stinging pain, occasionally darting along the spermatic chord, and also an almost perpetual seemingly rotatory motion felt in the testicle itself, causing a very great degree of uneasiness to the unfortunate patient. The scrotum is in general lax, and the testicles, (one frequently more than another,) hang down much lower than is natural, and there is often a pain, or certain sensation, experienced in them of the most distressing nature. The external parts of generation also, in common with the rest of the body, suffer considerably. The penis is shrivelled, and there is often discharged from the urethra, a sort of thinner fluid than semen, especially while at stool.

We shall find this shrinking of the penis a very frequent occurrence in these cases, because it is closely connected with the existing state of the seminal vessels. Thus, in castrated animals, the parts forming the penis shrink in a wonderful degree. Indeed, many instances have been observed where the penis, although formerly of a full size, had become so small that it could scarcely be seized between the finger and thumb, and, on the seminal vessels being restored to health, the penis again resumed its former size.

Some individuals are incapable of the slightest erection, while others have the most painful erections every night, while in bed: often altogether unaccompanied by any desire for sexual intercourse.

These not only prevent the due refreshment from sleep, but before morning, reduce the parts to a disagreeable state of painful feeling, from which they scarcely recover before the following night, when, from the same cause, they relapse into their former state. Indeed such sleep as is obtained, yields no sort of comfort or refreshment, for the individual almost always feels languid and oppressed, even on getting out of bed; and there is an occasional sort of burning hectic, alternated by a sensation of cold running down the back, towards the loins, which continues to wear away his strength.





The most dreadful effect of this disease, even, where the mind is still alive to the extent of the patient's own wretchedness, is certainly where a sort of indescribably painful twitching is felt in some parts during the intervals, and a convulsion of the whole body is experienced immediately after each emission. He is even sensible of, and yet is unable to put a stop to it; the body is drenched in cold sweat, he is oppressed with a most distressing faintness, and total imbecility to move the position of his body, and the extremities often, for hours after, lose in a great measure, their sense of feeling.

Such is the alteration which this disease produces, particularly in inveterate cases, that its victims become totally different in every respect, both bodily and mental, from what they formerly were. The body is reduced from the utmost state of strength to the greatest possible degree of debility; in some it is bloated, in others haggard; but in both there is a paleness accompanied by blue blotches on the face, and often ulcers on the body, which, added to their horror of mind, even as depicted in their countenance, far exceeds the power of description.

It is scarcely to be credited, except by those who have frequent opportunities of witnessing it, what an astonishing effect this morbid state of the seminal vessels has on every faculty of the mind as well as on the body. While the bodily form fails,—while the eyes sink in their sockets, and the vision is languid and indistinct—while he is susceptible of cold and easily affected by changes of the weather, the senses also partake of the general wreck, and are either altogether depraved, vitiated, or destroyed. The memory generally fails first—then the sight, the hearing, and every faculty of the judgment are gradually, all, less or more, impaired, till the sufferer is reduced to an almost complete state of idiocy. Thus unfortunately situated, he is perpetually overpowered by the most painful and dreadful melancholy gloom; he takes no delight in the society even of his greatest friends; and in constant anguish and remorse, with perpetual restlessness, often sheds tears at the recollection of his wretched situation —he pines in solitary and unavailing misery—none know his distresses, and none can pity him. If in company, he is often absent, dejected, and takes no interest in the general conversation. He even loves to brood over his misfortunes; magnifies them, if possible; is perpetually miserable, both awake and in his dreams; he is gloomy, morose, and suspicious that every person is laying plans for his destruction; his feelings are indescribable, and he is in perpetual terror, he knows not for what.





The stomach is not the last organ in the human system to suffer under the complication of disorders, which this obnoxious habit engenders. When its baneful effects begin to be felt on the system, indigestion of the most extraordinary and most painful character ensues. It is preceded in some instances by loss of appetite, in others quite the contrary, but although the sufferer may eat moderately or even voraciously, digestion is not performed in a healthy manner, so as to afford the proper degree of nourishment and support to the system; but instead thereof the food when in the stomach is changed by the putrefactive fermentation, and foul and putrid eructations, with excessive flatulence arise therefrom, and severely influence the brain, causing the most extraordinary feelings in that organ, such as no pen can faithfully describe. The strange and singular feelings which patients in this state undergo, while the process of digestion or rather of indigestion is carried on, are such as to cause the greatest uneasiness both mental and corporeal, and constitute one of the most distressing of all the complicated disorders which attend this unhappy state of the system. A. common sign of the peculiar indigestion attending the indulgence in the practice of the trespass of Onan, is a sinking feeling which is not unfrequently felt at the pit of the stomach, and which is so annoying, that persons suffering from it are ready to undergo any thing to get rid of it.

The organs concerned in the vital process of respiration do not escape unscathed. Breathing is rendered hurried and short; it becomes difficult and painful on ascending staircases or heights of any kind: in fact that state which has been termed breathlessness by medical writers, is usually induced under the circumstances we have endeavoured faintly to describe. In addition to this, the unfortunate patient is frequently troubled with a short dry cough, hoarseness, occasional attacks of sore throat, weakness of the voice, an unpleasant expectoration, pains about the chest, fetidity of the breath, and many other symptoms indicative of the disorder affecting the nerves supplying the chest and its contents, and the parts of the system which are connected therewith.





The injurious effects which result from the protracted influence of these unnatural practices, involve every organ of the human body, whether they be of vital importance, or merely subsidiary to the great functions of life. Thence ensue a considerable diminution of the powers; paleness in a greater or less degree; sometimes a sallow, cadaverous aspect, with pimples about the face, but particularly on the forehead, which frequently gather, and leave unsightly scars; sometimes remarkable leanness, surprising sensations at the change of the seasons, particularly in cold weather; a heaviness and languor in the eyes, a weakness of sight, with a considerable decay of the faculties in general, and particularly of the memory. We must also rank the hypochondriac melancholy under the head of tabes dorsalis, of which it is no uncommon attendant; and if those who are afflicted with it give themselves up to irregular practices, it completes all the accidents that flow from that disorder, and renders the patient completely miserable. The unhappy sufferers in this malady become truly an object of compassion; we ought to be very careful in bestowing some time for inquiry into their complaints, and pay them the most careful attention, for indeed there can hardly be a greater degree of misery, or one more afflicting to humanity. This disease, though perhaps one of the most afflicting to the human mind, is that which draws the least compassion from friends; no heart seems sensible of their distress, no soul is touched with their sufferings, because the- distemper does not immediately destroy those whom it attacks: as if death were the greatest evil, and most to be avoided by human nature; yet, perhaps, in this instance, that we cannot die become* the greatest calamity, and makes the most afflicting circumstance of the situation in which the sufferer is unfortunately placed. Many suicides are committed by those labouring under this malady. To see no outlet from the wretched darkness in which the unhappy sufferer is involved; to whatever corner he turns to be continually opposed by something like despair, which points her dagger to the breast, and defends the sole path which can lead to ease, and extricate the patient from the maze, which appears impossible to the gloomy situation of his soul: such is the criterion of this disease. All seems bursting in upon the sufferer; on whatever side it is viewed no light shines upon the mind, or if it does, it resembles those flashes of lightning in a stormy night, which only serve to make the darkness visible, and add horror to the scene. This is the state, in general, of those who are unfortunately afflicted with this disease; this is the situation which the unthinking and giddy often laugh at, because the disorder is not immediately fatal. To describe every symptom of this disease, is to paint almost all others which attend the long train of sickness, so various is it in its appearance; yet, by strictly examining all, and attending to those symptoms, which are the never-failing companions of this disorder, we may trace it back to its primary cause; and thus settle a proper method of treating it, and perhaps effectuate a cure by going directly to its origin. In diseases, where the symptoms are so numerous and apparently so contradictory, to discover one which will assign a cause for the rest, is what is to be wished, and always to be endeavoured after. This, it appears to us, may be obtained in this instance, and without much difficulty, where the practitioner has a good share of experience: not unfrequently, the abuse of the functions of generation are the preceding causes, destroying the appetite and lessening the vital heat, thus producing the very same symptoms that follow the other forms of disease arising from the same cause.





The symptoms then, as they are generally found in various persons, under the inauspicious influence of this malady, are nearly related to those affections of the human frame which have been previously mentioned, and are as follow;





Not unfrequently spasms, like those attending epileptic fits, a grievous head-ache, confined to a very small spot of the head, palpitations of the heart, sometimes a dry cough, those complaints resembling the iliac passion giving the countenance a sallow tinge, like the jaundice; also complaints exactly resembling the gravel. Very often a pain from the back of the head, down the whole length of the spine or back-bone. The legs sometimes swell, but are distinguished from the hydropic, by their not pitting, and by the swelling being greater in the morning; a sensation of cold in all the external parts, when the patient is attacked periodically; this symptom generally begins the paroxysm, and continues while it lasts; the urine is sometimes limpid, and in large quantity, at other times the contrary, with sometimes a chalky farinaceous and pink-coloured sediment; foetid or sour eructations from the stomach, and a rising in the throat; frequently a low pulse, sometimes a cadaverous aspect, great dejection of spirits, and internal sinkings; at other times tears, without any cause to provoke them; the soul appearing to be sick rather than the body, cherishing as it were the idea of its own sufferings.

Other writers, besides those who have been already alluded to, have spoken of the baneful consequences of onanism. Celsus in his excellent work on the preservation of health, says, "these pleasures are always hurtful to the strongest constitutions; and how much more so must they prove to such as are of delicate frames." Galen too has observed that the same causes occasion disorders of the brain and of the nerves, and destroy the powers. He also mentions the case of a man, who was labouring under the effects of this malady, and who died while attempting the act of conjugal intercourse. Pliny the naturalist mentions two such instances.

The effect of this baneful practice upon a nobleman of Berne, in Switzerland, the history of whose case is handed down to us by Platerius, could be attributed to nothing but the spasms he had brought upon himself in his early life. He entered, says this celebrated physician, upon marriage, at an advanced age, with a view to get an heir to his estates and honours; and at the time he was endeavouring to consummate his nuptials, he was





seized with a violent suffocation, which obliged him to discontinue.

The like accident happened to him every time he made the same attempt. He applied to Platerius for his assistance, who, finding him in apparent good health in other respects, was somewhat surprised at his case, till he had related the history.

Platerius told him he was sorry he had not made application before. It was his duty to advise him to desist from any more attempts, till such time as he tried the effects of his remedies. But his advice was not followed. The Swiss noble ventured on a fresh essay; the event was immediately the same as before, but, being resolved to go through with the operation, he died in the very act in the arms of his wife. His body was examined after death, and the seminal vessels were to be discovered eroded with corrupted matter, which Platerius supposed caused the spasms, and ultimately by the depressing influence they exerted on the nervous system, caused his death.

Emission in the unnatural way is accompanied with a kind of convulsive epilepsy. The weakness which follows the act has appeared to several persons, and not without reason, as a proof that it could not be solely the privation of semen which occasioned it: but what demonstrably proves how much the spasms must weaken the human frame, is the feeble state of many of the patients who have fallen under our care, at various periods in life, labouring under maladies arising therefrom: we have seen some affected as if epilepsy had attacked them.

Tulpius, the celebrated physician of Amsterdam, has published the particulars of a case well calculated to shew the horrible consequences resulting from this dreadful practice. "Samuel Verspretius," he says, "applied to him for advice; his complaint was, a flux of seminal matter which flowed from him at all times, but particularly when at stool, and in the company of women, without having the powers of manhood; in length of time it became sharp and acrimonious, attended with great pain. After this, a scorbutic eruption broke out on the hind part of his head and the nape of his neck;,





thence it extended to the spinal marrow, the loins, the buttocks, and the articulation of the thigh, which made this unfortunate man suffer such excruciating pains, that his countenance was distorted, and he was seized with a slow fever, which by degrees consumed him, but not so fast as he desired; and he was in such a situation, that he frequently invoked death, before it snatched him from his misery."

As has been already stated, all the important viscera of the body are involved in the complication of symptoms which characterise the indulgence either of the sexual passion in great excess, or of the still worse and still more destructive habit of masturbation. As a matter of course the heart, the central organ of circulation, which in every respect must evidently be greatly excited in all the acts of generation, could not escape. Indeed when we consider the increased energy of the circulation during the act of sexual intercourse, and. bear in mind the hurried breathing and the powerful action of the heart, we cannot be surprised that its repeated excitement during the act of manustupration, practised so frequently as it generally is, should tend to induce serious derangement of the function, and to cause palpitations, which if not constant, are easily brought on by the slightest cause.

Another and very efficient reason may also be alleged for the disordered action of the heart under the circumstances to which we have alluded, and that is the enormous expenditure of the nervous fluid which necessarily takes place, as a consequence of the act we have so often characterised as dangerous and unmanly in the extreme. Physiologists have long been doubtful whether the animal spirit and the nervous fluid are the same; but observation teaches us that those two fluids if not identical, have a very strict analogy, and the loss of the one or of the other produces similar evils to the constitution.

The eyesight again suffers greatly from these practices. The eyelids become affected with a chronic kind of inflammation, and secrete a watery fluid during the day, which at night-time becomes thick and inspissated, so that the eyelids, those coverings and protectors of the organs of vision, become adherent together, and cannot be separated without trouble and difficulty. The eyes themselves also are engaged in the general mischief—the sight becomes dim, a veil as it were hangs over the organs, impeding their utility, and rendering it impossible to keep them occupied in examining one object continuously for a certain length of time. If not previously in that condition, the unhappy victim of so much misery speedily becomes short-sighted, or myopic; dark spots float before the eyes; flashes and corruscations of fight are seen impinging on the nerves of vision, which become so sensibly weakened, as to render it almost impossible to use the organs in any ordinary avocation after daylight, while the bright light so divinely shed on the earth by that glorious luminary, the sun, becomes painful and annoying to eyes, weakened in their nervous energy by the exhausting drain to which the system has been so long subjected.





"A consultation," says Hoffman, "was held on a young man, who, among other ills which he had drawn upon himself by unnatural practices, was afflicted with a great weakness of sight. This young man, having given way to this practice, at the age of fifteen, till he was three and twenty, was at that period seized with such a weakness in his head and eyes, that the latter were frequently affected with violent spasms at the time of his seminal emissions. When he wanted to read anything, he was taken with such a kind of stupor, as intoxication creates; the pupils of his eyes were very much dilated, and he suffered exquisite pain in them. The fids were very heavy, and after shutting themselves at night, a whitish foul matter gathered in their corners, which were painful. He frequently shed tears without being able to assign the cause of his melancholy. Although his appetite was very good, he was reduced almost to a skeleton, and as soon as he had done eating, he was in a kind of intoxication."

The organ of hearing, like all the other organs of the body, having its supply of nervous fluid diminished in consequence of the great demand made on the system by the unnatural excitement of the parts of generation, fails in the performance of its duties. Persons living under this wretched exhaustion of the frame, become deaf, and are affected with a singing in the ears, and other noises which become painfully distressing.





"I have seen a patient," says the illustrious professor Boerhaave, " whose disorder began by lassitude, and a weakness in all the parts of the body, but particularly towards his loins; it was attended with an involuntary motion of the tendons, periodical spasms, and bodily decay, insomuch as to destroy the whole corporeal frame; he felt a pain even in the membranes of the brain; a pain which patients call a dry burning heat, and which incessantly burns internally the most noble parts: I have also seen a young man afflicted with the tabes dorsalis. His person was very agreeable, and he had been a youth of elegant form; although he was cautioned not to give way too much to pleasure, he nevertheless yielded to its impulse; he became so deformed before his death, that the fleshy substance, which appears above the spinal apophyses of the loins, was entirely wasted. His brain appeared consumed; in fact he became stupid. He became rigid in all his articulations. I never perceived so great a want of motion in the body from any other cause. His eyes sunk, grew dull, and he lost the power of sight." On opening his body, after death, the seminal ducts which open into the urethra were found completely corroded from the morbid state of the parts; which appeared to be in a putrid state, and the matter having been absorbed into the circulation had brought on a consumption. His lungs appeared to be decayed, and his liver obstructed, his kidneys were diseased, and even the mucus which lines the intestines was found in a purulent and corrupted state.

The first object of medical treatment in this state of things, is to endeavour to convince our patient of the impropriety of the act of onanism; after which, if it be timely abandoned, the remedies hereinafter enumerated will be required. An idea may be formed of the importance of the seminal liquor, by observing the effects it produces as soon as it begins to be formed; the voice, the physiognomy, and features of the face change; the beard grows, and the whole body often takes another appearance, because the muscles acquire a firmness and power, forming a sensible difference between the body of an adult person and that of a youth not yet arrived at the age of puberty; these changes are prevented by destroying that organ which serves to separate the liquor that produces it ;. and experience has shewn that the amputation of the testicles, at the age of virility, has made the beard fall, a puerile voice return, and the whole frame become effeminate.





Can the power of its operation on the body be questioned after this, or can any one entertain a doubt of the various ills that must necessarily flow from a profuse and rapidly repeated evacuation of a humour that is so precious. Its destination determines the only proper method of its being evacuated. Certain distempers cause it sometimes to run off. It may be and frequently is involuntarily lost in lascivious dreams.

If the dangerous effects of the too abundant discharge of this humour depended only upon the quantity, or were the same when the quantities were equal, it would be of little importance, in a physical sense, whether this evacuation were occasioned by either of the methods mentioned: but the manner is in this respect much more than equal to the substance. Too great a quantity of semen being lost in the natural course, produces very direful effects: but they are more dreadful when the same quantity has been dissipated in an unnatural manner, from the extraordinary effects which are produced on the nervous system. The accidents which happen to such as exhaust themselves in a natural way, are very terrible: those which are occasioned by masturbation are infinitely more so.

Sanctorius furnishes us in his own Observations with the primary cause of this peculiar danger. "Moderate coition" says he "is useful when nature solicits for it; when it is solicited by the imagination, it weakens all the faculties, and particularly the memory." This is easily explained. Nature in a state of health, does not inspire desires; but when the vesiculae seminales are replete with a quantity of liquor, which has acquired such a degree of thickness as to render its return into the mass of blood difficult; under these circumstances, when an evacuation follows, we may be assured that the body will not be thereby sensibly weakened. But such is the organization of the genital parts, that their action and the desires which succeed are put into play, not only by the presence of a super-abundant seminal humour, but also the imagination having great influence upon these parts, it may, by being occupied by desire, put them into such a situation as serves reciprocally to excite them; and desire leads to the act which is more pernicious in proportion as it is unnecessary. This organ of convenience is like all others, which are never properly actuated, but when nature stimulates them. Hunger and thirst indicate the want of food and drink; if a greater quantity of either be taken than these sensations require, the surplus prejudices and weakens the body. The necessity of going to stool and voiding urine, is signified by certain physical conditions; but a bad habit may so far influence the constitution of the organs, that the necessity of these evacuations may no longer depend upon the quantity of matter to be evacuated. We subject ourselves to want without being in want; and such is the case of masturbators. It is imagination, habit, and not nature, that importunes them. They drain nature of that which is necessary, and also of that which she herself would have taken care to dispose of in a manner better adapted to the exigencies of the system. At length, in consequence of that law of the animal economy, whereby humours are attracted by irritation, there is a continual afflux of humours upon these parts, and that which Hippocrates formerly observed occurs, " when a man practices coition, the seminal vessels are dilated, and attract the semen." This however, as has been already observed more than once, occurs in a much more marked and more injurious manner, when it is excited by the act of masturbation, than when it originates from the moderate enjoyment of sexual intercourse.





It has been already observed, and in support of the observation we have quoted the authority of the most distinguished practitioners of the last and former ages, that irregular practices are more pernicious to the constitution than excesses committed with women. We are told in holy writ, that the young female who lay with David increased his strength. In that of irregular practices the individual loses, and receives nothing. Hence we may discover, in observing the effect of the passions, a difference in those who addict themselves to women, and those who are habituated to irregular practices; a difference that is totally to the disadvantage of the latter. That joy which the heart is sensible of, and which should be nicely distinguished from that voluptuousness solely corporeal, which man enjoys in common with animals, and from which it is completely distinct; this joy aids digestion, animates the circulation, accelerates all the functions, restores strength and supports it.





If this be found united with the pleasures of love, it contributes to repair, it contributes to restore what they stole by force; and observation proves it. Sanctorius, a most ingenious physician and professor, at Padua, who flourished in the last century, has remarked it.

His words are: "After excessive coition with a woman that is beloved, a man is not sensible of the lassitude which should follow this excess, provided the seminal tubes which convey the semen into the urethra are not eroded with purulent matter, because the joy which the soul feels increases the strength of the heart, favours the functions and repairs what was lost." Upon this principle Venette, another very ingenious physician (in whose works we find a good chapter on the dangers attendant on unnatural venery), maintains that having correspondence with a handsome woman does not exhaust so much as with an ugly woman.—" Beauty has charms which dilate the heart and multiply its spirits."

We shall range under seven heads, the ills of which patients complain.

I.—Involuntary nocturnal emissions; pains in the back, and often in the head; weakness of the memory and sight; and a mucous discharge from the urethra, especially after straining at a discharge of the excrements; an aching pain, rolling, and a pendulous condition of the testicles, as represented in the plate. The testicles being the secretory organs of the genital fluid, are furnished with arteries, veins, lymphatics, and nerves, lite other glands, and are suspended by the cremaster muscle. When, therefore, from any cause, the texture is weakened, a pain will be felt, and this is increased by their hanging down, caused by that general relaxation of fibres that affects the whole body, and the cremaster muscle in particular.





II.—All the intellectual faculties are weakened, loss of memory ensues, the ideas are clouded, and there is an incapability to attend to general business and even tD ordinary occupations, reading, writing, the society of friends, etc.; the patients sometimes fall into a slight madness, they have an incessant irksome uneasiness, continued anguish, and so keen a remorse of conscience that they frequently shed tears. They are subject to vertigo; all their senses, but particularly the sight and hearing, are weakened; and their sleep, if they can obtain any, is disturbed with frightful dreams.

III.—The power of the body decays, and the growth of such as abandon themselves to those abominable practices before it is accomplished, is greatly prevented. Some cannot sleep at all; others are in a perpetual state of drowsiness. They are all affected with hysterical or hypochondriac complaints, and are overcome with the accidents that accompany those grievous disorders— melancholy, sighing, tears, palpitations, suffocations, and faintings. Some emit a calcareous saliva; coughs, slow fevers, and consumptions, are chastisements which others meet with for their crimes.

IV.—The most acute pains form another object of patients' complaints; some are thus affected in their heads, others in their chest, stomach, and intestines; others have external rheumatic pains; aching numbness in parts of their body, when they are slightly pressed.

V.—Pimples not only appear in the face, (this is one of the most common symptoms,) but even suppurating blisters and carbuncles upon the nose, chest and thighs: and painful itching in the same parts. One patient complained even of the fleshy excrescences upon his forehead. All these symptoms show to what an impure condition the blood is reduced.





VI.—The organs of generation also participate in that misery of which they are the primary cause. Many patients are incapable of erection • others discharge their seminal liquor upon the slightest titillation and the most feeble erection, or in the efforts they make when at stool. Many are affected with a constant gonorrhea, which entirely destroys their powers, and the discharge resembles fetid matter or mucus. Others are tormented with painful priapism, dysuria, strangury, heat of urine, and difficulty in rendering it, which greatly torments them. Some have painful tumours upon their testicles, penis, bladder, and spermatic cord. In'a word, either the impracticability of coition, or a deprivation of the genital liquor, renders every one imbecile, and more or less impotent, who has for any length of time given way to this crime.

VII.—The functions of the intestines are sometimes quite disordered, and some patients complain of stubborn constipation, others of hemorrhoids, of a fetid matter from the fundament, or else of occasional and troublesome attacks of diarrhoea.

The physiognomy, that faithful mirror of the state of soul and body, gives the first indication of the internal disorder. The complexion and plumpness, which jointly confer a youthful look, and which is the sole substitute of beauty (for without this even beauty produces no other effect than cold admiration,) are the first things that disappear; then a leanness succeeds, and the skin becomes rough and dry, and tinged of a lead colour; the eyes lose their brilliancy and deaden, and by their languor express that of the whole frame; (See Plate 5 No. 1 ;) the lips lose their vermillion hue, the teeth their whiteness; and in a word it is no uncommon thing for the whole body to receive such a shock, as for the shape to become entirely distorted.

The increase of dangerous consequences flowing from masturbation, is too obvious to need comment; persons suffering therefrom are too sensible of it themselves, from the shocking remorse with which it is followed. When illness has opened the criminal's eyes, he sees his crimes and danger, and feels

"The sting of pleasure which remorse succeeds."





When the mask is dropped, and the real picture of their conduct appears in its most hideous colours, they find themselves guilty of a crime, the punishment for which divine justice ordained nothing less than a slow and lingering death, approaching with the most fearful tortures, both bodily and mental, to which any human being can be subjected.

These various consequences are so completely illustrated and embodied in the following case, that it would be wrong to omit quoting it:—

L.D. was by profession a watch-maker; he had lived prudently, and enjoyed a good state of health till he was about seventeen years of age. At this period he gave himself up to self-pollution, which he repeated every day, sometimes even to the third time, the evacuation being always preceded by a slight insensibility, and a convulsive motion in the extending muscles of the head, which drew it very much back, whilst the neck was extremely swelled. A year had not elapsed before he began to feel a weakness after every act. This notification was not sufficient to rescue him from his filthy practices—his soul already devoted to this excitement was incapable of appreciating any other, and the repetition of his crime became every day more frequent, till such time as he was in a state to apprehend the approach of death. Grown wise too late, the evil had already made so great a progress that he was incurable, and the genital parts were become so irritated and were so weak, that it was no longer necessary that this unhappy youth should be an agent in order to shed his own seed: the slightest irritation immediately procured an imperfect erection, which was followed by an evacuation of this liquor, so that his weakness daily increased. The spasms of which he was not before sensible but in consummating the act, and which then ceased therewith, then became habitual, and frequently attacked him without any apparent cause, in so violent a manner, that during the whole period of the fit, which sometimes lasted fifteen hours and never less than eight, he felt such violent pain in the back of the neck, that he not only screamed out, but absolutely howled, and all this while it was impossible for him to swallow solids or fluids.





His voice became hoarse, he entirely lost his strength, and was obliged to give up his profession, being altogether incapable of attending to it. Thus overwhelmed in misery, he languished almost without any assistance for some months, and was the more to be pitied, for what memory he had remaining, and which he was at length entirely bereft of, only served him to take an incessant retrospect of the cause of his misfortunes, his wretchedness being consequently continually increased by the aggravating horrors of remorse. He less resembled a living creature than a corpse; lying upon straw, meagre, pale, and filthy, casting forth an infectious stench, almost incapable of motion, a watery palish blood issuing from the nose, the tongue frightfully swelled, and saliva constantly flowing from his mouth. (See plate 5, No. 2, of the case.) Having a diarrhoea, he voided his excrement in the bed without knowing it; he had a continued flux of semen: his sore watery eyes were deadened to that degree that he could not move them; his pulse was very small, quick, and frequent. It was with great difficulty he breathed, reduced almost to a skeleton in every part except his feet, which became dropsical. The disorder of his mind was equal to that of his body; devoid of ideas and memory, incapable of connecting two sentences, without being afflicted at his fate, without any sensation than pain which returned with every fit, at least every third day:—far below the brute creation, he was a spectacle, the horrible sight of which cannot be conceived, and it was difficult to discover that he had formerly made part of the human species. He died at the end of a few weeks, his body having become generally dropsical.

All who give themselves up to this odious and criminal habit, are not so severely punished; but there are none who are not so more or less. The frequency of the pollution, the variety of temperaments, and several circumstances independent of either, occasion considerable differences. The symptoms we have the most frequently witnessed are a total derangement of the stomach, which in some announces itself by loss of appetite or by an irregular desire for food; in others acute pains, above all during the time of digestion, or. habitual vomitings,





which resist every remedy, so long as they continue their vicious habits; a weakness of the organs of respiration, whence frequently result dry cough, almost always hoarseness, weakness of voice, and shortness of breath upon making any short violent exertion, and finally a total relaxation of the nervous system.

Let us here be permitted to insert the fragments of some letters, which united will form a sufficiently complete picture of the physical disorders produced by masturbation. "I plainly feel," wrote one patient, "that this bad practice has diminished the strength of my faculties, and above all of the memory." I, like many other young persons had the misfortune to give way to the habit as pernicious to body as to the soul: age, assisted by reason, has for some time sinoe cured me of that wretched penchant, but the evil is done. To an affection and extraordinary sensitiveness of the nervous system, and the accidents it occasions, are added a weakness, an uneasiness, an ennui, a distress of mind, which seem pertinaciously to adhere to me; I am worn out by an almost continual loss of semen; my countenance is become pale and almost cadaverous. The weakness of my body renders all motion a trouble to me; that of my legs is frequently such that I have great difficulty in keeping myself on my feet, and I dare not venture to leave my room. My digestion is so bad, that my food passes through me almost unchanged, three or four hours after taking it. My chest is loaded with phlegm, which keeps me in continual pain, and the expectoration wears me out. This is a brief description of my miseries, which are still more aggravated by the mournful certitude I have acquired that each succeeding day will be more painful than the previous one."

"Did not religion restrain me," says another, "I should already have put an end to a fife so much the more cruel, as it is my own fault."

In fact, there is no situation in the world worse than that of mental affliction: pain is nothing in comparison with it, and when joined to a crowd of physical evils, it is not astonishing that the sufferer should wish for death as the greatest blessing, and consider life,—if so wretched an existence can be called life—as a real misfortune.





The following description is more brief and less terrible :—

"I had the misfortune to contract that pernicious habit, which soon ruined my temperament; but above all of late years, my state has been truly pitiable: my nerves are extremely weak, my hands are always trembling, without power, and continually clammy with perspiration; I am subject to violent spasms in the stomach, pains in the arms, the legs, sometimes in the loins and chest, frequently so as to induce severe and harassing cough; my appetite is voracious, yet I fall away considerably, and my face every day becomes more cadaverous."

"Nature has discovered to me," writes a third, "the cause of the debility I have fallen into, and the danger of the abyss in which I was precipitating myself, both by the pimples and blisters which showed themselves in the part which was the instrument of my crime, and by the weakness I felt during the commission of the crime itself, and which did not permit me to doubt of its being the cause of it."

We might here add a great number of relations of similar diseases for which we have been consulted, but they would only be useless repetitions.

Nothing, perhaps, weakens the intellect so much as these pernicious practices, which take possession of the whole mind and attention, and prevent their victims from following their respective vocations, by engrossing their faculties with the most lascivious thoughts and their consequences, even when they should be employed in devotion or business; rendering them stupid, dull, and thoughtful, and destroying their vivacity, cheerfulness, and health: bringing on consumption, weakness, barrenness, and all that dreadful train of complaints, which makes them timid, uncertain, full of whims, and ridiculous. The mind is agitated with frightful ideas and horrid dreams, which ultimately render them fearful of being left alone for a few minutes. Surely such a train of miseries might be sufficient to deter young persons from entering on such courses! They should take time to consider, that every act of this kind strikes deeply at the root of the constitution, inevitably hastens the attack of many alarming diseases, and brings on during the prime of manhood, all the languishing infirmities of old age, and finally premature dissolution.





How weak, then, must be their intellect, who seek for pleasure by delusive and deceitful means. True felicity and earthly happiness can never attend those whose faculties of mind and body are corrupted and buried in the vortex of imaginary and unnatural enjoyment and desires. If those, then, who labour under the mental infatuation of such poisonous principles, would let reason resume its sway, and nature her prerogative, how sudden would be the transition from all ideal, to real and substantial bliss! For if life's nature in all its various forms, conditions, and demands, becomes invalid, and the passions and sensibility of the frame corrupted, how can you possibly anticipate the attainment of reciprocal love and conjugal regard, when the basis is destroyed, and you have yourselves rendered its organs incompetent, and perverted its source and influence? But another all powerful claim hangs over you, a sacred debt, an awful responsibility and duty which you owe to your inheritance, your forefathers, and above all, to your Creator, who ordained you for the propagation of mankind, and that you should not destroy the powers bestowed upon you, by followng a destructive habit of so immoral a tendency, of so heart-rending a description, and of so degrading a nature.

Then let us urge the victims of such deadly self-intemperance no longer to continue to dwell in the purgatory of such sin, but by self-castigation throw off the bitter infatuation, and by a persevering endeavour regain the blessings of mankind.

It is chiefly on the youth of both sexes that self-pollution commits most ravages. This is so much the more mischievous, and so much more to be deplored, as it thus strikes at the very root of society, and has a direct and immediate tendency to destroy it, by enervating and debilitating, almost from their very cradle, those





individuals whom nature's God intended as best adapted to preserve and adorn it. How many of these debilitated and emaciated objects daily present themselves to our view, with pallid and haggard countenances and sunken eyes, who are indebted solely to the abominable practice of masturbation for this wretched state of debility and exhaustion! Disabled from rendering any service either to themselves or friends, they drag on a life totally useless to others and a burden to themselves, in the midst of society in which they are despised.

It were needless to expatiate more upon the dangers peculiar to masturbation; they are but too real, and too well demonstrated.

Having .described the dreadful effects resulting from the practice of self-pollution, we shall now enter upon the

METHOD OF TREATMENT AND CURE;

and, in the first place must observe, that before any remedy can be administered with any prospect of success, the patient must determine on abstaining entirely from the practice of this heinous crime, this abominable sin, condemned alike by God and man; and here we may observe that this in general is the most difficult point to get over, for when it is habitual it holds such a powerful sway over the mind, that the most determined mental energy is required to overcome this dreadful propensity.

To restrain the passions of the mind is a more difficult undertaking than to improve the body. We frequently observe male quadrupeds remarkably courageous, and impelled by furious desires after their arrival at puberty; but a lively imagination and social principle renders love a much stronger and more durable passion in human beings, than in any other species of the animal kingdom. Consumption, tabes dorsalis, tremor of the nerves, and premature old age, as already frequently stated in the pages of this work, are not unusual consequences of undue sexual excitement among the youth of the present day, while madness, melancholy and sometimes suicide are the frequent result, both of disappointed love and of the exhaustion of the nervous system consequent on venereal excess and on the practice of onanism.





Unfortunately neither the sedative powers of leaden girdles, the anti-spasmodic virtues of camphor bags, nor the cooling properties of nitre have any other than an imaginary effect in subduing this powerful passion, which requires the exertion of the rational faculties to give a proper direction to the laws of nature. Hence arises the utility of a virtuous education to restrain unruly passions, particularly when youth begin to throw off the authority of parents. The principle of shame, and habit of self-denial ought to be strongly impressed on the young mind before the arrival of this period of life. Dissolute companions, dalliance between the sexes, and the high coloured extravagant fictions of some novels which influence the imagination, and excite a state of morbid sensibility ought to be cautiously guarded against. The passions awakened before their natural season are the common destroyers of the youth of both sexes. And after they are fully established, too much attention cannot be had to the choice of proper associates, and the selection of the best recreations. To keep the mind and body in a state of constant employment, and to observe temperance in diet and drink, are the most essential correctives, morally speaking, of the inexperience, enthusiasm, aud impetuosity of persons in the youthful age. These remarks are equally applicable to the correction as to the preventives of bad habits. This task is however by so much the more difficult.

Let reason then resume her seat, and become a convert to chastity and honour, for the debility of Nature can be completely reinstated by the celebrated

CORDIAL BALM OF SYRIACUM,

which has restored bodily and sexual strength and vigour to hundreds of debilitated individuals, of both sexes, previously deemed past recovery by professional men of the first eminence and respectability, and numbers of whom for the purpose of benefitting mankind, have come forward and personally attested upon oath their wonderful release from intense suffering, and speedy recovery from inveterate complaints; its re-animating powers almost exceed credibility; by its fine rich stimulating balsamic and stomachic qualities, it causes the purification of the blood, and also the complete reinvigoration of the nervous system, so that the faculties become restored to their proper power and functions, and the fallen fabric of life is raised up to beauty, consistency, and duration, while the evidences of premature decay give place to sound and pristine health.





In that part of our practice in particular where the Cordial Balm Of Syriacum requires to be employed, it would be unreasonable in us not to expect the most determined opposition, party spirit being exerted exactly in proportion to the good effects of any newly proposed remedy for the cure of disease; and the proposer, together with the remedy, without a fair trial being given either to the opinions of the one or the power of the other, is often overpowered and put down by that concentrated mass of stupidity and influence, through which the light of science can rarely penetrate. Such contracted views are calculated solely for the comfort and happiness of those who entertain them, not, except in mere form, for the alleviation of that mass of human misery, which while it perpetually surrounds us, calls aloud for our interference and relief.

Since our former publication on the use of this wonderful medicine appeared, we have had numerous opportunities, not only of confirming the doctrines there advanced, but of carrying out our views to a much greater extent than we ever expected. Our experience on this subject is now not only general, but on the principles we then hastily delivered, is uniformly successful; the numerous favourable communications, which we daily receive from every part of the United Kingdom, convince us, that in a much shorter time than important improvements in the practical part of our art commonly meet with public sanction, this practice will, under proper regulations, at once become still more general, and even more extensively successful.

No disease to which the human frame is liable, is treated more by stubborn, general, and hacknied rules than those of the generative system; whereas excepting in their very mildest form, none require more close attention. This generalising plan, or total neglect, sometimes on the part of the patient, sometimes on the part of the surgeon, and sometimes on the part of both, and even injudicious treatment, which must solely be owing to the medical attendant, have often reduced a once healthy and robust constitution to the greatest possible degree of lingering misery. The various effects that urethral discharges have upon the animal frame, depend greatly on the influence they exert on the mind: in some, nocturnal emissions lay the foundation of seminal weakness and gleet, and cases occur where the system having long laboured under the influence of nocturnal emissions, feels more powerfully than it would under other circumstances the nervous irritation which usually accompanies a profuse discharge of the semen; proving beyond doubt, the existence of chronic debility; for that which has little effect on one constitution, will produce in others symptoms extremely harassing both to the body and mind; and thus a complex derangement arises, the combined result of a concatenation of events that may be traced, even with mathematical precision, to the debilitating cause: fcr we are led to infer that seminal weakness precedes this nervous derangement: and to us it is evident, that when nervous debility exists, the nocturnal emissions are increased; the repetition of them unquestionably weakens the vital energy, and after an indefinite period, predisposes the cerebral organs to morbid irritation. Thus from sympathy with the nerves, the general system becomes disturbed, and the body and mind are rendered susceptible to the caprice of that vicissitude of irritation whose universality of influence can only be described by those who have felt its energy: nor is the effect of this influence the offspring of a fervid or depressed imagination: on the contrary, a class of painful and distressing diseases is originated, which, in their progress, have a great effect on the organization. This morbid irritability more frequently attends on constitutions previously debilitated by venereal excess, or, more frequently still, by the baneful habit of onanism, by which the parts are not





only so weakened, but are also rendered so irritable, and from habit, so easily excited by mental influences, that the slightest stimulus is sufficient to call them into action, and thereby produce a discharge of vitiated semen.

This disease arises from a spontaneous erection of the penis, often imperfect, and a discharge of semen unsolicited by the patient, who frequently is unconscious of it till awakened by the act of emission: this is caused either by the distended and congested state of the vessels, or is the consequence of lascivious dreams inspired by the general unhealthy tone and excited condition of the brain and the other organs connected with the function of generation. Of this act men are mostly unconscious; if however it arrests attention, its frequency and its consequences are the circumstances that rouse the proper and natural fears of the sufferer. Frequently occurring nocturnal emissions are a decided proof of debility, and the certain harbinger of approaching impotence. Our ample experience warrants the conclusion that the debility is more obviously confirmed, and absolute impotence more certainly follows in those instances where emissions occur pretty frequently, the sufferer waking suddenly in the night, at the moment of the discharge. In many instances the sleep is not broken, and it is comparatively difficult to ascertain how often the evacuation occurs: the consequences of the loss of the seminal fluid are however sufficiently evident. Occurring more frequently than can be fairly ascribable to the distention of healthy vessels, the most energetic measures are instantly requisite to avert the same amount of mischief, which would arise if the loss of the seminal secretion were solicited and voluntary. The only remedy, perhaps, of real efficacy, and from which, by perseverance, a permanent cure will be obtained, is "The Coedial Balm Of Syriacum," which is possessed of this admirable quality, in preference to any other ever yet discovered, that with little or no stimulus, it restores the tone of the system, in a manner incredible to those who have not observed its effects.

It is from a strong impression that no cure can be





effected, that this disease has been allowed to make progress; and hence has arisen that melancholy train of diseases connected with general debility. With this prejudice is connected the fear of not being able to perform the grand function of nature; for, next to the necessities connected with the preservation of the individual, the most imperious is that which is subservient to the propagation of our species; every one feeling proudly solicitous to exhibit proofs of his manly prowess, in this mysterious and most important act of the sexes. The emission of semen takes place towards daybreak, arising from a renewal of that general excitability which occurs during the first sleep; the interval between rendering the system more susceptible of every additional impression; and the debility of a sensitive mind favouring the impression, emission succeeding emission, the above described association is further confirmed, and the difficulty of destroying the habit rendered more tedious and evident, while the power and desire of performing the natural functions are proportionally impaired. The mind encroaching upon the prerogative of the natural stimuli, the organs of generation, either from a morbid rapidity of action, or from being long accustomed to obey the dictates of the imagination on the slightest irritation, are no longer capable of the excitement produced on a healthy subject by the opposite sex. As a disease of the mind called into action by all the possible causes that produce physical and moral irritation, the first object is, to destroy the acquired association of ideas existing between the mental and organic action, and to prevent the mind from recurring to its former associations; else the stimulating power will exhaust its excitability to such a degree, as to bring on direct debility; for the exciting power being disturbed, the natural functions of the body gradually grow more and more languid. The constitution thus gives way, as it were, before the ravages of the disease, and exhibits a most hopeless state of exhaustion; all its powers are drained, all its energies lost; and the disease eventually riots upon a hapless imbecility, which no physical nor moral remedy can reach—an imbecility closely united to, and not unfrequently terminating in mania. But what





indescribable process it is that precedes this mania, we have no actual theory to guide us: the immediate cause of this most obscure of all human maladies we cannot trace, as none but the miserable sufferer can describe the tension and pain of those hallucinations, morosities, and burning sensibilities, that, by a gradual but certain action, drive reason from her throne: medical inquiry is confined to external symptoms alone, and, of course, possesses no means of following the inward progress of the disease. Its existence is generally indicated by great debility, listlessness, want of resolution and activity, a great disposition to sadness, an idea of future evil, a continual brooding on misfortune and on the errors of life, and a long train of similar sensations, which powerfully contribute to debilitate the general system: this effect is manifested by the body becoming feeble and meagre, the appetite voracious, the organs of generation so flaccid and enfeebled, that the slightest titillation produces erection, which is succeeded either by an emission of a portion of the natural mucus of the glands of the urethra, of the prostate and seminal vesicles, (but not of semen,) and a depression of spirits, with a fearful exhaustion of the frame: these symptoms, by constant repetition, become very unpleasant during the night, and a source of constant wretchedness, so that the sufferer can rarely if ever be seen to smile. A constant discharge of thin, clear, slimy liquid is at last produced; attended by that nervous irritability, which in delicate constitutions, lays the foundation of more serious consequences, and, if it continue, will reduce the patient to the last stage of a confirmed consumption.

The prominent character of Seminal Weakness is general, not partial debility, and principally of the nervous system, although as the disease advances, the entire frame participates, and every organ becomes deranged in the performance of its functions; it is very frequently combined with venereal affection, very often accompanies gleet, and may occasionally precede it. A seminal gleet is invariably attended by a weakness of the whole body, loss of appetite, and a heavy pain round the region of the bladder and the loins; the semen comes away insensibly on coughing, going to stool, and the slightest irritation of the penis, whose erection, though constant is feeble, the semen being easily ejected, but without the force requisite for its expulsion in health: the discharge is of a humid, thin and blueish cast, slightly staining the linen.





We shall treat this disease as solely arising from the operation of Onanism; for here the secreting power of the testicles is too rapid for the penis, which, wanting a corresponding erection, scarcely participates in the act of emission; hence it follows, that the erection of that member depends more,on the mind than on the secretion of semen.

It is in this stage we are to consider seminal weakness of a dangerous tendency; we generally find no particular affection of the organs of generation; the semen here flows from an involuntary action; while in the other two, the action of friction or titillation produces the discharge.

This malady is not a disease of health and repletion, but of ill health and depletion; a disease bf exhaustion and direct debility, induced by a morbid action which has caused a too general and permanent excitement of the animal machine. In the former stages, copulation is recommended, because Nature herself dictates it; but in this we have a different object to obtain; for here we have to supply a superabundant waste of the semen—we have to replete, not deplete; to defend the system against the consequences of repeated exhaustions, caused by the unnatural loss in large quantities of the most important fluid in the body, and however salutary sexual intercourse may be to a person in perfect health, here it must be used with considerable prudence. Sexual ability in man is a mysterious compound power, requiring a perfect association in the action of the secretory organ of the seminal secretion, and the instrument of the ejaculation and discharge. Any functional irregularity, or want of correspondence between the action of the testicles and penis, is therefore an unquestionable state of disease; for since both are so closely and intimately dependent on each other, the least want of exactness in their adaptation may be the cause of Impotence. Whatever be the mode in which





this deviation from the healthy and natural action of the parts is first introduced; it is not difficult to trace its inevitable effect in the production of Seminal Debility, and the ultimate destruction of sexual power. Irritation, however engendered, rapidly propagates itself along the urethra, chronic inflammation of the prostatic and most sensitive portion of that canal is rapidly established, and the muscles surrounding the membranous division of the urinary passage are sympathetically affected with irregular spasms. The irritation extends itself by continuity of surface to the seminal vesicles, and even to the testicles, producing in the former unnatural evacuations, and in the latter an exaggerated thin secretion, too rapidly poured out, and therefore worthless, for all the purposes of generation. Among individuals so affected, the emission (even on attempting intercourse with the sex,) too quickly occurs, nocturnal pollutions are frequent (indeed these are often the immediate precursors of seminal weakness,) or the semen is expelled during the evacuation of the bladder and bowels. With some there is more or less complete extinction of venereal desire, then the erections become few and feeble, incomplete, or absolutely null.

This condition of the sexual organs has its appropriate general character, analogous to those which are attributable to the wilful and determinate pollutions of earlier youth: the sufferer now perhaps too late, sensibly alive to the origin of his weakness, becomes timid, fearful, careless of the world around him, his mind absorbed in the consideration of his malady, until the continual presence and recurrence of the same train of painful thought involves him in the worst form of monomania, or rather the premature childishness of age. All the functions of the body languish, and are deranged, until a complete general degradation sweeps with uncontrolled dominion over every power and faculty both of body and soul. The seminal fluid may dribble away without pleasure, without erection, without the natural ejaculation, and its loss, when occurring in this manner, gives rise to the same or infinitely greater evils than those which arise from mere sexual excess, or what is worse, from selfpollution. There have not been wanting some writers who have contended that not the semen, but only the mucus of the canal or the prostatic fluid, furnishes the discharge in these deplorable cases. But we know that this is far from being a correct view of the pathology of the disease. Mere chronic inflammation, arising from common causes, may be accompanied with ample mucous discharge; but Seminal Weakness is, in the majority of instances, the ultimate consequence of self-pollution, which in the first instance brings about that irritability which evinces itself in nocturnal discharges; and subsequently in complete debility of the whole generative system. The seminal fluid, such indeed as it is, weak, thin, effete, and devoid of all fructifying agency, is undoubtedly the fluid which the organs suffer to escape, and to prevent its further flow, as well as to give healthy tone to the secretory and retentive vessels, ought to form our first care. The shock to the nervous system, and its repeated excitation and disturbance, are not the only avenues to disease and powerless prostration consequent upon the loss of seminal secretion. For where the debility is great, and the dribbling loss of thin semen, draining involuntarily from irritable vessels, occurs daily, there is progressive weakness not referrible to mere orgasm or voluptuous excitement. Self-pollution is a very general source of this distressing malady. Few constitutions are capable of bearing the loss of this fluid in excess, even in a natural manner, without the probability of inducing the same kind of debility; but when recourse is had to preternatural excitement, dismal is the train of suffering which surely follows. In the early stage of seminal weakness, different persons are variously affected; some are incapable of procuring a discharge of semen into the passage of the female genitals in a natural way, though they may effect temporary erection; whilst others cannot perform the act of copulation because emission takes place too quickly, and before the requisite firmness of the male organ has enabled it to effect the necessary penetration.





Then let no illusion force your thoughts and inclinations contrary to their natural dictates; for if, by a selfexterminating power you annihilate the power bestowed upon you by nature, in vain shall you seek to partake besides, there is not any wonderful virtue in abstaining from the proper use of the organs of generation. Why in the name of morality, were such powerful impulses and desires bestowed upon us? Why were such wonderful organizations given to us ?—if they were not originally designed to be used by every one who is possessed of them? Society, in its present form, Is not perhaps constructed with a philosophical regard to our own natural instincts, and our original rights.





Impotence in the male, may arise then from a wide diversity of conditions. Incapacity of erection, generally referrible to self-pollution ;—from a want of power of retention in the seminal vessels, induced by a morbid susceptibility of those vessels, brought about in like manner by a persistance in the same vicious practice ;—~from inability of retention resulting from repletion of these vessels ;—and from mental influences. Exclusive of this, the generative infirmity under consideration, though occasionally arising from simple disease, is ascribed in by far the greater majority of instances to the delusive and mentally annihilating propensity of Onanism.

Next to Self-pollution, excessive venery is a frequent cause of impotence, as well as of sterility among the male sex. This is a frequent cause of want of offspring in young married persons. In these cases the semen may escape without the aid of the ejaculatory muscles, is imperfect in quality, devoid of procreative power until the health is improved, or if impregnation ensue, the child undoubtedly partakes of the debility of the parents, and is soon to be consigned to a premature grave, the victim of that nameless atrophy, or wasting decay, which hurries thousands of infants annually to the tomb. In these cases, the male parent generally suffers from inflammation of the seminal vesicles, or there is seminal weakness with more or less involuntary discharge.

We have been consulted frequently by patients, who when performing the venereal act were subject to have only one of the cavernous bodies of the penis in a state of erection, the consequence being, that the penis became incurvated on that side, constituting a disorder very difficult of cure, especially when resulting from an error -in the fabric of the parts: but even when both the caver





such circumstances, the unfortunate female falls a prey to some artful seducer, her offence is not altogether without a justification, and the injured husband may accuse himself as the cause of her unhappy deviation from the paths of rectitude.

In some instances the power of the male genitals is not altogether destroyed, nay impregnation may occur in a healthy female, from the laborious embraces of one whose constitutional vigour is almost entirely destroyed. But the offspring—can it be rationally expected that the child of such a father should be otherwise than puny, feeble, and predisposed to those diseases which under the most favourable circumstance destroy so large a proportion of children. Instances of this deplorable description come too frequently under the eyes of medical men: sometimes the infant dies before the birth; at others it expires immediately on entering the world.

It therefore follows that there are and may be varieties of seminal weakness, which though not absolutely precluding the performance of the sexual act, may render that act unfruitful, or else eventuate in the production of progeny to whom a sickly short-lived existence is rather a curse than a blessing.

Although seminal weakness and gleet are sometimes to be found co-existing, in one person, yet they are not necessarily connected with each other, as we have often found them separately. When they do exist together, one of the most obstinate forms of gleet is that which arises from such a state of the parts; for the individual being conscious of moral turpitude, and at the same time allured by this singular gratification, perseveres in his bad practices, and long conceals the malady which entirely deranges the action of the seminal vessels, gradually exhausts his frame, and destroys every mental faculty; till at length the interference of relations and friends, who are alarmed at the progress of emaciation and decay, and his own intolerable weakness, and the anticipation and dread of death, induce him to apply for medical advice.

This state of disease may sometimes be the combined effect of self-pollution and venereal infection, although such a state may also arise from the long continued debilitating effects of mercury.





Creator than a simple command, with a view to enforce obedience to the decree, he connected ecstacy with obedience, thus subduing, by the spell of pleasure, that natural disinclination to bend, even to the will of Providence, which exists, even to this moment, in the depraved mind of man.

"Our Maker bids increase, who bids abstain

"But our destroyer, foe to God and man 1"



Milton, Book iv.

The penalty of disobedience to this command is the loss of that ecstatic enjoyment; a penalty so heavy, that few are disposed to incur it. Nature has implanted in us a powerful disposition to perform the duty, rather than to hazard the total loss of the delight with which it is accompanied; and every feeling of the human heart revolts from the surrender of that moral obligation enforced by Heaven, and the relinquishment of which must inevitably lead to the deprivation of so considerable a portion of the enjoyment of life.

Sterility, or barrenness, was of old recorded among the curses with which the Almighty punished tribes, families, and individuals; and although, in this advanced age of society, the case may appear somewhat qualified in a religious sense, yet, that it is a real curse is evident from the discontents, anxieties, and discords, which accompany it in the married state. There is nothing which seems to console us so effectually, for that we must quit this brief and chequered state of being, as the prospect of perpetuating our professions, names, and, in some degree, even our lineaments. We seem thus to triumph over oblivion; to possess a strong guarantee that we shall, although in our own transitory forms resolved into common dust, still survive in those images which have sprung from our bodies, and partake not inconsiderably of our character, likeness, and disposition. As we approach the confines of the grave, we feel a greater necessity for some reliance of this sort. The mind, as we approach the portals of death, loves to cling more closely to the progeny in which it is to revive and continue the scene of existence. Then it is that the curse of sterility is felt in its full force, when the desolate and infirm wanderer is tottering over the tomb, and dis/.covers that there will be left behind no memorial of name and being—then is the full affliction of a childless parent found in the dread of an oblivion never to be broken.





In marriage, the wife relies on the hope of children, to relieve the many tedious hours caused by the necessary absence of her husband. In their presence she looks for an ample relief from the gloom of loneliness; for those endearing companions, who, in more mature life, may in some instances, become the substitutes of her husband, and, in the event of the marriage tie being broken by death, prove the solace and support of her widowhood. In proportion as the female disposition has been habituated to dwell on these anticipations, must be the regret and sorrow which will ensue from a disappointment of hope. She cannot look for relief to those active employments, which during many years, may blunt the disappointment in the husband. The only remedy she can find will be in the resources of her own mind; and the character and extent of these resources depend mainly on the education and example of her early life.

The causes of sterility in women are numerous. One of the most frequent, however, is the existence of the malady called leucorrhea, or whites. Barrenness is also very often caused by a retention, irregularity, or profusion of the menstrual secretion, thereby giving rise to the diseases known by the names of chlorosis, or green sickness, amenorrhoea, or obstructed menstruation, dysmenorrhea or painful and scanty menstruation, and monorrhagia, or excessive menstruation and flooding. It may also proceed from a natural frigidity of temperament or from aversion, reserve or indifference, instead of an appetency and pleasure; in short from an irrespondence in the feelings of the female to those of the male.

How much domestic unhappiness is hence induced. What scenes of dissension, sorrow, and remorse, do we not find to result from this indifference. How fruitful a source is it of unfaithfulness to the marriage bed. And when it is accompanied by sterility on the part of the female, what reproaches, and even disgust does it not give rise tP,—converting love to hatred,—making the nuptial couch a bed of thorns, instead of roses,—marriage a curse rather than a blessing.





We are, indeed, aware, that by many men of high attainment in the less enlightened period of medical information, relief has been deemed impracticable. But we are also perfectly aware of the possibility of a cure in all these cases; and that even where the disease of sterility appears to have taken the firmest hold of the female constitution, assistance can be given to the suffering patient, not through the application of transitory stimulants, to the destruction of all constitutional vigour and ultimately of life; nor yet by speculative remedies, which, by changing the symptoms and appearance of disease, may induce hope, and Jead to ardent expectations—only to destroy them in the end. But simply by the softening, tonic, and prolific qualities of the Cordial Balm Of Syriacum, which will warm and purify the blood and juices, increase the animal spirits, invigorate and revive the whole animal machine, and remove the usual impediment to fertility.

Nature has assigned to females a class of diseases from which the other sex has been exempted, and no care or attention will enable women entirely to escape from their influence. From the very character and construction of the female organs, there are peculiar crises in their lives when every solicitude is attracted to them. And we come now to speak of a most important period of female life, viz.: that period when the menstrual flow, by its gradual disappearance, warns the party of an eventful change. It is usually known as the turn of life, and takes place from about the 40th to the 45th year; though it is sometimes delayed longer.

The diseases that spring up at this time are numerous and formidable ;, and it behoves all women undergoing the change in question, to reflect seriously on their situation. Let them not suppose, that because many have passed through the turn of life with little difficulty, it is therefore to be neglected; for, though a safe conduct through it is ensured by the use of the Cordial Balm Of Syriacum, yet such is the fatal effect of negleet, that we are assured more women ares carried off during the period when the cessation of tbe menses takes place, than at any other period of life.





At the time this fluctuating change is going on, the constitution should be most carefully regulated, for the menstrual vessels do not suddenly surrender their secretive powers, but usually a distressing irregularity torments the patient, attended with internal pains, sometimes actual enlargement of the womb, which may be mistaken for pregnancy, &c.; indeed, many are the presumed disorders that the sufferer attaches to herself, often unwilling to allow the important truth; and, it is to be lamented that habitual dropsy is not unfrequently the penalty of concealment. Some are afflicted with the well-known symptoms of plethora, heat, flushings, restless nights, troublesome dreams, and unequal spirits; others are attacked with spasmodic affections, stiffness of the limbs, swelled ancles, piles, and other indications of plenitude. When the menstrual discharge is about to disappear, it becomes irregular both in time, quantity, and quality; sometimes sparing, sometimes profuse. Women, however, must be sensible of the peculiar influence this secretion has upon their frame, and we have only strenuously to advise them, as soon as any symptoms of constitutional derangement shall begin to display themselves, to commence a course of the Cordial Balm Op Syriacum, which must be taken according to the general directions.



As there may be some of our readers who may think the descriptions given in this little work, of the gross enormity and terrific consequences of indulging in the vicious habit of self-pollution, have been exaggerated by us, we shall take the liberty of adducing a few passages from Holy Writ itself, in corroboration of the sentiments we have expressed. The validity of an appeal to such an authority is irrefragible and undeniable, inasmuch as its truth is above impeachment, and its purity above suspicion. Nor shall we allow ourselves to be deterred from appealing to such a tribunal by the sneer of the infidel. The object we have proposed to our





selves in the composition of this work, is, we trust, good; and every legitimate means we can employ to enhance its value, and recommend its perusal to youth and adults we are determined to avail ourselves of. We all know that to different individuals, different species of proof bring different degrees of conviction: but in the present case, wherein we adduce observed, established, and authenticated facts and results, and when we trace these facts and results by the process of analytical reasoning, and by the laws of induction to their causes, and when we make it manifest that such causes are adequate to produce such and such effects; when, in addition to all this human demonstration, we bring to our aid the word of God himself, who neither "can deceive nor be deceived," unyielding and obdurate indeed must that man be, who can resist the combined forces of such overwelming authorities! We shall now without further apology, adduce our proofs from Scripture of the enormity of the sin of self-pollution.

St. Paul in his Epistle to the Ephesians, chap, v., v. 6., says—" Let no man deceive you with vain words; for because of these things cometh the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience." "Keep thyself pure," says the same apostle ;—1 Tim. chap. v. v. 22. And again: "Unto the pure all things are pure; but unto them that are defiled, nothing is pure; but even their mind and consciences are defiled." St. Paul's first Epistle to the Thessalonians, chap, iv., v. 3, 4, 5, and 7,—" For this is the will of God, even your sanctification that ye should abstain from fornication. That every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in sanctification and honour. Not in the lust of concupiscence, even as the Gentiles who know not God: for God hath not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness." Epistle to the Romans, chap, xiii., v. 13.—" Not in chambering and wantonness." "Walk not/' says he, " as other Gentiles walk, who being past feeling, liave given themselves over to lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with greediness," •^Ephesians, chap, iv., v. 17, 19. "Know ye not that your bodies are the members of Christ? ShaJl I then. take the members of Christ and make them members of a harlot! God forbid!" 1 Cor. chap, iii., v. 16.— "Know ye not that your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you, which ye have of God, and ye are not your own 1" And in the same to the Corinthians, chap, iii., v. 17.—" If any man defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy, for the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are."





But if it had not been revealed to us that God is highly offended at all manner of uncleanness, when we reflect on the end of marriage in all countries, and in all societies, and the manner according to which God has ordained that our species should be continued, natural religion and our own reason would instruct us, that to prevent that object must be very offensive to God; that the crime in itself is monstrous and unnatural; in its practice filthy and odious in the extreme ; its guilt is crying, and its consequences ruinous; it destroys conjugal affection, prevents natural inclination, and tends to extinguish the hopes of posterity.

In the foregoing pages, it has. been proved that the hurt which either sex may receive from self-pollution, is corporeal as well as spiritual; because those who have once committed this act, have in a grievous manner offended God, and although many of strong constitutions may for some time have been guilty of this sin, without any perceptible harm to their bodies, yet how to redress the spiritual injury received, shall be our first and chiefest care. There is no Christian who can be ignorant that no pardon can be obtained for this as well as other sins, without repentance in general; but many are apt to deceive themselves concerning the nature of repentance, as not well knowing in what it consists; wherefore it is requisite something should be said of the manner in which this duty ought to be performed, as well as of its necessity.

The repentance of those who are polluted by this sin, should remain with them to their lives' end. These are not sins which a man can forget, but their memory ought to be always fresh, that the penitent may truly say with David, "My sins are ever before me." Not only the time that has passed since the commission of it, but even the amendment of life, does not take away the sense of so great a fault; but, on the contrary, hebecomes more and more sensible of it. Even this thought, that the sinner has had the happiness to obtain the pardon of his guilt, will render the remembrance of it the more bitter; and the greater progress he makes in holiness, the more abominable will his wickedness appear. The greater experience he has of God's goodness, the more he will accuse and loathe himself; and the more hope he has of salvation through God's goodness, the more will he be affected with the danger of being excluded from it, to which he had exposed himself.





Another great duty that belongs to repentance, is conversion and amendment: the guilty must forsake their sin, and continue no longer in it. When bur blessed Saviour pardoned the woman taken in adultery, he said to her "Go, and sin no more." The crime must, therefore, be totally renounced; and they who do not this, but relapse into it, have not really repented of it. Every act and every repetition of their sin, is an aggravation both of their guilt and punishment.

Before concluding, we think it right to mention, that, in many instances, patients who have in early life indulged in the habit of self-pollution, are frequently, many years after they have abandoned the pernicious habit, annoyed and rendered wretched by the consequences which it has left behind it. Such persons are troubled with involuntary discharges, pains in the back and limbs, and several other anomalous symptoms, which the experienced practitioner will at once refer to their true origin. To such persons we would earnestly recommend an immediate recourse to the Cordial Balm Of Syriacum. The success which is to be derived from its use, is of such a nature as to insure to the patient, a restoration to health and vigour.

It is of course, unnecessary to state, the success of the treatment herein recommended, as well as the celerity of the cure, are, in all cases, invariably proportioned to the attention with which the directions contained in this Work are complied with.





GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS,

To be observed by those labouring under Generative Debility, Seminal Weakness, Impotence, Nocturnal Emissions, or Deficiency of Natural Strength, while under a course of the Cordial Balm Of Syriacum.

ADVICE AND PLAIN RULES FOR PATIENTS.

The first step that should be taken with regard to the cure, is, to leave off those practices that have occasioned the disease,—though it may appear to be a difficult matter, as the very soul itself is generally so much polluted that it can dwell on no other idea. However by a sincere repentance, and fixed determination to desist before it is too late, there is not the least doubt but that the irritability and tendency to excitement may be subdued, provided the following rules be attended to.

Although the efficacy of the Cordial Balm Of Syriacum is such, that in most cases no assistance is required from any thing else, yet a due attention to air, exercise, sleep, and regimen, is in all cases proper, and in some absolutely necessary. A few words on each of these heads will be sufficient.

Wherever the patient is, he must not neglect exercise; it should be moderate at first and augmented by degrees, being always left off before a feeling of great fatigue is experienced. All exercise is best fasting, and with regard to the kind of exercise most conducive to health, none is preferable to walking. Violent or long-continued exercise of mind or body, impairs the muscular strength, on account, it is presumed, of the dissipation of the subtle enlivening fluid. In fact excess of all kinds is certain to be injurious.

Much depends on a due regulation of sleep, especially as the want or disturbance of that great restorative is one of the most distressing symptoms of the disease. To contribute effectually to the cure, it should be sound and not too long; the best way of procuring sleep is . upon a hard bed or mattress; rising early, taking sufficient exercise and proper food during the day, and supping lightly. The greatest attention should be paid by the patient both to the quantity and quality of his food: he should rather eat a little and often, than gorge himself with a full meal at any one time. This rule is the more necessary as a preternatural voracity of appetite is a frequent symptom in this and every other species of decay. Animal food should be taken once a day. Hot and heavy suppers are very injurious in every way. They not only tend greatly to disturb and disorder the functions of the stomach, which in this complaint are rendered preternaturally weak, but they also have a great tendency to increase that irritability which renders the sleep broken and unrefreshing.





Roots, as potatoes, parsnips, carrots, &c., afford much nourishment: and, at dinner and supper, drink good pure water, discoloured with a little wine, or else very good table beer, &c. Spirituous liquors in any form are very injurious, as are also some malt liquors. From two to three glasses of port wine or claret may be taken, especially after or during dinner.

For weakness, deficiency of natural strength, and relaxation of the vessels, by too frequent indulgence of the passions, the Cordial Balm Of Syriacum with the Purifying Specific Pills, constitutes a safe, certain, and invaluable remedy; and if, during the time the patient is under a course of these medicines, he were to accustom himself to the use of sponging the whole body with cold water, every morning on first getting out of bed, it would be highly beneficial: it should be done quickly, and followed with a rough towel. It has considerable effect in giving tone to the skin, and maintaining a proper action in it, and thus proves a safeguard to the injurious influence of cold and sudden changes of temperature; therefore, a person who is in the habit of thus fortifying the skin, will be much less likely to suffer injury from heated rooms, and the change from a hot room to the cold air. It also exerts a peculiar influence on the skin itself, which in the numerous and exhausting complaints dependant on onanism or their causes, becomes rough and dry, the pores of the skin being in an unhealthy and unnatural state, in common with the other excretory organs of the body.





The cold bath recommends itself in a variety of cases; and is particulary beneficial to the inhabitants of populous cities, who indulge in voluptuousness, or lead sedentary lives. In persons of this description the action of the solids is always too' weak, which induces a languid circulation, a crude indigested mass of humours, and obstruction in the capillary vessels and glandular system. Cold water, from its gravity, as well as its tonic power, is well calculated either to obviate or remove these symptoms. It accelerates the motion of the blood, promotes the different secretions, and gives permanent vigour to the solids. These important purposes are always most essentially answered by sea-bathing; salt water ought to be preferred, not only on account of its superior gravity, but likewise for its greater power of stimulating the skin, which promotes the perspiration, and prevents the patient from catching cold. The warm bath occasionally renders essential service by reducing the local tendency to congestion and spasm. Cases however may occur in which the water in the hip-bath should be tepid, and sometimes even quite cold, that it may act as a tonic and detersive to the skin, and other parts in the neighbourhood. Cold water enemata are sometimes of service on the same principle. The general warm bath would be injurious, by determining blood to the brain, and causing congestion of that organ, which is already in an irritable state.

The use of the Cordial Balm Of Syriacum, and sponging the body regularly every morning on first getting out of bed, are pointed out by the nature of their virtues: they produce the same effect; and being combined, will cure disorders which every other remedy would but have increased. Being strengthening, sedative, and febrifuge, they re-invigorate, diminish the feverish and nervous heat: they calm the irregular motions produced by the spasmodic disposition of the nervous system; they fortify a weak stomach, and quickly dissipate its attendant pains; they restore appetite, facilitate digestion and nutrition, and promote all the functions and particularly perspiration, which renders them so efficacious. In a word, they remove all the disorders occasioned by weakness, provided the patient be not afflicted with indissoluble obstructions, inflammations, or internal ulcerous abscesses, which conditions almpst necessarily exclude the benefit of their operation.





THE CORDIAL BALM OF SYRIACUM

Is sold in Bottles at lis. each, or four quantities at lis. in one large Bottle for 33s., by which one lis. Bottle is saved.

May be had of all Medicine Vendors in Town and Country, the Continent of Europe, and America.

PREPARED ONLY BY

MESSRS. R. AND L. PERRY AND CO.,

CONSULTING SURGEONS,

19 BEENEES-STEEET, OXEOETJ-STBEET, LONDON.



Patients are requested to be as minute and exact as possible in the details of their cases, as to the duration of their complaint, the symptoms, age, habits of living, and occupation. The communication must be accompanied with the usual Consultation Fee of One Pound; or a Post-office order to that amount, to ensure its safety; without which, no notice whatever can be taken of their application unless £5 be remitted for a Case, which then entitles the patient to advice without the fee; and in all cases the Most Inviolable Secrecy may be relied on.

MESSRS. PERRY & CO.,

MAY BE PERSONALLY CONSULTED AT THEIR

ESTABLISHMENT,



19, BERNERS-STREET, OXFORD-STREET, LONDON,

PUNCTUALLY FROM ELEVEN TILL TWO, AND FROM FIVE TILL EIGHT.

AND ON SUNDAYS FROM ELEVEN TILL ONE.





GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR TAKING THE CORDIAL BALM OF SYRIACUM.



In all cases where the Cordial Balm Of Syriacum is administered, the patient should take one tablespoonful half an hour before breakfast; about eleven o'clock; five in the evening; and about an hour after supper; by itself, or in a wine-glassful of water, until health is perfectly restored. And when the Cordial Balm Of Syriacum is taken for the cure of nervous debility, seminal weakness, impotence, nocturnal emissions, and deficiency of natural strength, Perry's Purifying Specific Pills should be administered also, in doses of two Pills at night and one in the morning.

In respect to the Cordial Balm Of Syriacum, it should be understood, that its effects on the varied complicated diseases, are surprising and singular, as it at once favours the reproduction of the semen, removes radically all affections of the generative organs Jn both sexes, substituting vigour for impotence, and introducing fecundity in place of barrenness; we therefore wish to impress upon the minds of patients taking the same, that perseverance is necessary, because it is not at all uncommon for the patient to take half the quantity necessary for a radical cure, before he perceives Any material benefit.

Some disorders have been many years in proceeding to such a degree of malignancy, that they cannot be eradicated in a few weeks; in order therefore to encourage steady perseverance in the use of proper means, Messrs. Perry have adopted the plan of packing into boxes, THREE LARGE BOTTLES, containing the quantity of twelve at 1 Is. for Five Pounds, by which there is a saving of £l 12s. independent of which the patient in entitled to the full benefit and advantage of Messrs. R. & L. Perry's advice, without the usual consultation fee, this rule being applicable only to those who remit £5 for a packet. The patient is requested to be as minute as possible in the detail of the case, when the medicine will be immediately forwarded.





The £5 cases of medicine can be had only direct, from Messrs. Perry, the most safe way of remittance is to obtain a Post Office order for £5, made payable to Robert and Lewis Perry, at the Post Office, ZIOi Oxford-street, by which considerable delay will be prevented, or, if more convenient, the money may be enclosed in a letter, and upon payment of one shilling at the Post Office, the same will be registered, so that persons sending any amount will be indemnified against loss.

Patients who correspond with Messrs. Perry, should always preserve the same signature to prevent trouble and delay, as the correspondence is carefully arranged alphabetically, and must be examined previously to any medicine being prepared; this is important, as reference must be had to the former letters upon every occasion.



There is a very important observation to be made respecting a Public Medicine, that unless its operation be gentle, safe, and efficacious, it must and will speedily sink into oblivion; and it requires the strongest conviction of its intrinsic worth and physical excellerce, by long and great experience, to induce the inventor or proprietor of any Medicine to incur the serious expense of making it known by advertisements; an expense of no less than £20,000 annually to Messrs. Perry and Co., independently of £6,000 a year paid for the Government Stamps affixed to their Medicines, an amount which a very great and general demand only can defray; and which nothing short of fatuity could induce any one to enter upon without the previous conviction of the intrinsic value of the medicine; for it could be of no avail to enter upon the task and the vast expense of making known such remedies, if their merits would not support their character when they were known.





THE SILENT FRIEND.



PART II.



A PRACTICAL TREATISE

ON VENEREAL AND SYPHILITIC DISEASES,

IN THEIR MILD AND MOST ALARMING FORMS,

INCLUDING



GONORRHEA, GLEET, STRICTURE, and SECONDARY SYMPTOMS

WITH A VARIETY OF INCIDENTAL DISEASES:

AND INTERESTING

REMARKS OCCURRING IN A MOST EXTENSIVE PRACTICE,

WITH OBSERVATIONS

ON THE ABUSE OF MERCURY.



GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON THE

VENEREAL DISEASE.



The nature of a specific contagion, whence originates the disease we are now treating upon, and which has the property of inducing, in the individual who suffers from it, a secretion possessing the same characters and capable of reproducing the disease in others, presents to us on all sides, a variety of difficulties, springing principally from the various shapes it assumes, according to the constitution of the patient, the malignity and virulence of the poison, its duration, and many other, perhaps occult, causes. We know that it arises from the absorption of a specific morbid poison, generally imbibed during the act of coition with a person actually infected; and that thus produced, it is capable of assuming that variety of forms which it exhibits in different constitutions, and which, depending on the nature of the virus, and the nature of the constitution by which that virus is received, gives rise to that multiplicity of symptoms, which, in some constitutions are slight and in others malignant. This pre-disposition to contagion is powerfully manifested in some persons, while in others the power of repulsion or an inaptitude to its imbibition is equally exhibited. How frequently do we find, that one individual shall transgress with a female labouring under the venereal disease, yet no symptoms or evidence of infection follow; while another less fortunate, under similar circumstances, and perhaps even with the same female, will have the disease shew itself in its most virulent features; in short it is an indisputable fact, that every venereal case, is a case sui generis, for in no class of disease do we meet with cases less similar to each other, either in regard to the period the disease takes to develop its action, or the characters it may display; these contrarieties appear to be greatly influenced by the existing state of the individual system at the moment of contagion: a knowledge of these facts, however, points out the necessity of the adoption of an early and unequivocal line of conduct in the first stage of our fears, so that we may not afterwards have occasion to regret that the absence of more decided symptoms betrayed us into an indifference which may lead, and has not unfrequently led, to future embarrasment and considerable personal annoyance. We would wish earnestly to impress on the mind of the patient, that during the early days of infection, the disease is generally easy of eradication.





This disease may be introduced into the system either in the natural and most common way, through the medium of absorbent vessels, or by transplanting a tooth of one venereally affected, into a sound person. It has also been not unfrequently conveyed by the touch alone, especially if the finger which is brought into close proximity with the diseased part





should happen to have an agnail, a chap, fissure, or broken place or wound of any kind. The poison of syphilis may and has been conveyed also by inoculation, as is or rather has been practised with the small pox. The diseases which it causes may be transmitted to the offspring, and by the child communicated to the healthy nurse by whom it is suckled. The poison has even been conveyed into the system by means of leech bites. In the first, it is necessary that the virus should pass through the absorbent vessels into the blood, while in the latter, the absorbent vessels are less necessary to the virus being conveyed into the circulation, although they still have a great influence in the transmission of the disease. In the former, the disease is generally comparatively slow in its progress, in the latter it is rapid and violent. The infecting matter cannot act through the medium of the air, but only through the medium of a fluid, as it cannot be communicated, except by the immediate contact of a sound with a diseased, person. And although, for the most evident reasons, it commonly appears on the genitals, particularly on the delicate surface of the glans penis, &c., the same virus is capable of occasioning morbid appearances on any other part or organ of the body.

Both sexes are equally exposed to venereal infection, but from the different structure of the parts, the symptoms in the female are scarcely ever so violent as in the male. This has been attributed to the simplicity of structure of the female organs of generation, but we are of opinion, that it arises more commonly either from the natural or from the morbid flow of fluids to those parts washing off the infected matter, and also perhaps from greater local cleanliness.

When infection takes place, the poison is conveyed into the system by the lymphatic or absorbent vessels. It is in consequence of their dispersion over the whole body, that the virus may be absorbed on any part to which it is applied, and, by means of their infinite connections, it may be diffused, often with extraordinary rapidity through the whole system.

The poison is absorbed more or less quickly, according to the structure of the part to which it is applied, and the existing peculiarities of the constitution, health, &c, of the person exposed to its effects. If, for instance, from the same connexion, virus be lodged on any of the parts beneath the prepuce, and upon the external skin of the penis, and if such virus act effectually on both of these parts, there will be a distance of many days between the appearance of the disease in those parts respectively; the virus lodged beneath the prepuce acting before that upon the external skin on account of its being so much thinner, more delicate, and more vascular than the common integument.





Like every other infectious quality causing disease, the venereal poison undoubtedly possesses greater virulence at one time than at another, and even, in certain intervals, may be almost quiescent, though not entirely impaired, in its powers. There can be no doubt, that the same circumstances attend every contagious disease.

The infection when it has been received in the usual way, within a certain time produces small ulcers, termed chancres, and afterwards, by irritating and inflaming the inguinal glands, when conveyed by the absorbents in its passage through them to the system, produces bubo in the groin. From external appearances, such as chancre, bubo, or other affections of different parts, we are usually guided in our opinions respecting the existence of this disease, yet the system may sometimes be affected by it, independently of the occurrence of either of these symptoms. In such cases, the glands of the groin are frequently more or less enlarged. By this single mark when we have no other leading symptoms, we may, in general, ascertain whether or not the patient be really affected with lues venerea, yet, it may often occur without previously producing either chancres, enlargement of these glands, or any other external sign of disease, though afterwards, blotches on the skin, ulcers on the tonsils, &c, will convince us of its actual existence in the system as a secondary disease. Though less commonly, sensations somewhat similar to rheumatism and not unfrequently mistaken by patients for ordinary rheumatic wandering pains, affect different parts, which at length settle in one or other of the bones either of the skull or face, or else in the long bones as they are termed, generally the shin bone or clavicle. These are the most common secondary symptoms, although many others occur in practice, and are to be found described by writers on this disease. These, however, we decline enumerating, as we wish principally to confine ourselves to the more common and more important occurrences.





The order, then, in which the venereal symptoms generally appear, after the virus has been absorbed, and before it has been checked, is, first, in the form of chancre, next, bubo, then eruptions, or ulcers on the skin, ulcers in the throat, peculiar inflammatory affections of the eye, and affections of the bones. The first two symptoms are not so apt to vary in the order of their appearance as the others, which, with the affections of the bones (which are almost always experienced last, or at least in them the pains are last felt) are extremely different in different individuals, both in regard to time and severity.

Thus, however circumscribed the first appearance of this disease may be, unless arrested in its progress, it gradually proceeds to affect other parts of the body, until at length it completely contaminates the whole living system, and finally may even terminate existence, having previously reduced the whole body to a complete mass of ulceration and almost of putridity.

Perhaps there is no condition to which human nature is capable of being reduced, which renders it a more horrible spectacle, than the accumulated evils of confirmed pox. We often have the misfortune to see the once manly and elegant form reduced to a complete mass of deformity. The eyes being tender, one or both squinting and considerably protruded from their sockets, vision being also more or less imperfect—the nose flat, and the nostrils discharging foetid matter in considerable profusion—the gums consumed—the teeth rotten—the sockets exfoliating—the breath horribly foetid and disgusting—the neck stiff—the joints either large and decrepid, or absolutely rigid, and totally unfit for their common offices—ulcers of the very worst kind on various parts of the body—the bones fearfully diseased,—the skin covered with a blotchy and noisome eruption—a ghastly and haggard appearance—and the mind a complete and irrecoverable wreck.





On the first appearance of this disorder in the Italian provinces, the horrid lacerations of the human frame, and the attendant excruciating tortures which it inflicted upon its victims, repelled like a plague, the approach of pity, and deterred those whom nature and affection prompted to lend consolation and assistance. Even those afflicted with leprosy counted themselves fortunate in their escape from this more tremendous evil, and shunned the unhappy victims of this disease as they would the bite of a venomous serpent or the shaft of unerring destruction. The poor were compelled to fly from their habitations as soon as any symptoms of the disorder manifested themselves, and take refuge in the abodes of the brute creation, in dens and caverns, and trackless forests. Physicians, friends, relations, and even parents forsook them; the ties of nature were rent asunder, and every social compact was annihilated—so predominant was the fear of infection! In fact, the laws which were made at that time and for many years afterwards against persons laboring under lues venerea were atrociously severe. Persons so afflicted, were sentenced to death if they approached within a certain distance of any principal town or city, and no one would render them the slightest assistance; so that they were left to drag out a miserable existence for the short space of time that still remained to them, deserted alike by friend and foe, until at length nature ceased to struggle against the ravages of disease; and the approach of death, instead of being dreaded, was welcomed, as the kindest and most happy termination that could be anticipated in the fearful misery under which they labored.

Many of the ancient authors give most disgusting details of the fearful appearances which the disease assumed in different subjects, but into these evils it is unnecessary now to enter, as the disorder is so well understood by those practitioners who make it their whole study. It will suffice to remark, that in many instances the symptoms closely approximate to those of Elephantiasis; in others,



V





to those of Leprosy; that the disorder frequently corroded the septum and bones of the nose, levelling that important feature with the face, and leaving a most unsightly deformity in its place; that it fed upon the lips: sometimes destroyed the uvula: at others perforated the palate, destroying alike the bones and the soft parts, and completely changed the tones and properties of the voice. The symptoms experienced multitudinous variations, with change of years, many of the old ones becoming greatly modified, and new ones developing themselves, to the great alarm of those who groaned under their influence, as well as to the extreme perplexity of the medical practitioners, who were yet in a state of comparative ignorance with respect to the real nature of the disease; their endeavours to repress its tremendous ravages were consequently directed rather with a view to speculative results, than by any of those positive rules of practice, which the industrious application of subsequent ages has rendered successful.

Yet, increased as is our knowledge of the nature of this malady, and improved as is our mode of treatment, it is by no means to be assumed that the disease has become of trifling importance, or that it carries no menace of consequence to the human frame; for with all its modifications, it is still a disorder of that subtle and malignant disposition, that it requires to be watched at its commencement and in its progress with sedulous attention, and to be attacked with all the powers that medicine has in store, as far as can be done without putting in peril the constitution itself.

Our attention, for many years past, has been exclusively directed to the treatment of venereal diseases, and of such complaints as arise more immediately from a disordered or diseased condition of the generative system, whether constitutional or acquired. In this statement we must not be understood to cast the slightest imputation upon the skill of other members of our profession, in the treatment of such complaints; on the contrary, we mean simply to infer, that, as in all important undertakings much can be effected by a division of labour, so it is evident that a man who confines his studies to one class of disorders, without diverting any portion of his attention to the more general objects of general practice, must be more intimately acquainted with them, and with more certainty be able to remedy them, than a man whose mind is occupied with the study of all the various and varying diseases to. which the frame is liable. We need no greater proof of this than the fact, that all great men who have excelled in their profession have made some particular branch of it their more immediate study. Hence some have excelled in medicine, and some in surgery; some in the diseases of men, some more particularly in those of women, and others in those of children. Again, many have applied themselves to the study of certain organs of the human frame; hence we have one man celebrated in the treatment of diseases of the brain, another in those of the eye, ear, stomach, lungs, &c, in short, almost all the different diseases and various organs of the body have, at least in large cities, had their respective professors. Perhaps if this system of the sub-division of medical labour and study had been more generally adopted, disease would not only be more thoroughly understood, but more especially relieved, and less frequent in its occurrence. But, of all disorders, there are none which require more direct, distinct, and uninterrupted study than those concerning the organs of generation; and certainly those members of the profession who direct their attention to these complaints expressly, are the most fit and proper to apply to for cure—so it may reasonably be assumed on our own part, that no less can be the result of an unwearied attention to that particular part of study, wherein we now offer to the public the knowledge and experience of a long and extensive practice.





We shall now enter into details of the various forms of this disease, with a view to render the whole subject clear and intelligible to all degrees of human capacity.



GONORRHEA, OR CLAP.

Gonorrhea is an inflammatory disease of the mucous membrane of the urethra, or urinary canal, produced by

M





the contact of infectious matter during sexual intercourse. The symptoms are a discharge of muco-purulent matter from the orifice of the urethra, with a sensation of scalding felt during the act of making water, which is more or less severe according to the virulence of the disease. The muco-purulent discharge which escapes copiously from the canal possesses contagious properties, * that is, it can communicate during sexual congress a similar disease to a person previously uninfected. It cannot however reproduce the disease simply by inoculation. Its action on healthy mucous membranes is caused by its peculiar stimulating qualities. These are the first and ordinary symptoms; and in some cases the disease stops here; but in others, and indeed, in the greater number of persons attacked, it is found to be much more severe. The discharge increases, the pain and burning sensation in making water become much more intense, the penis is excited to frequent and violent involuntary erections, particularly in the night when warm in bed, during which state it is bent into a curve, constituting that painful but well known condition called Chordee.

The absorbent glands in the groin sympathise with the adjacent disturbance, and become slightly inflamed; but, fortunately, rarely suppurate. The swellings produced by gonorrhea, are denominated Sympathetic Buboes.

Under certain circumstances, an inflammation of the foreskin occurs, whether when drawn forward on the gland of the penis, or drawn back. In the former case, it constitutes a particular affection, designated by medical men, Phymosis, in the latter Paraphymosis.

In cases of mismanagement or carelessness, or in consequence of a sudden suppression of the purulent discharge, an active inflammation of one or both testicles will arise, accompanied with much pain and swelling, called Swelled Testicle. The inflammatory attack in this case runs along the canal of the urethra, to the prostatic portion, where it invades the caput gallinaginis, extending along the common duct and the vas deferens, to the epididymis, which is generally the seat of inflammation before the body of the testicle itself becomes affected.





When the inflammation of the canal is severe, it will sometimes happen that, at the time of making water, owing to the rupture of some small blood-vessel in the urethra, a quantity of blood will be voided; but this is rather beneficial than otherwise.

The disease sometimes extends to the bladder, in which case that organ becomes exceedingly irritable; there is an almost constant desire to make water, and occasionally ulceration is produced, in consequence of which, a quantity of muco-purulent matter is discharged, which mingling with the urine, gives it the appearance of whey.

When a gonorrhea is often repeated, (and a person who has once had the disease, is very liable to have additional attacks) or when it has been improperly treated, as by the imprudent use of astringent injections during the inflammatory stage, or by intemperance in living, strictures will ensue—the most distressing, painful, and fatal disease the urethra is subject to, creative at all times of a difficulty of voiding the urine, and not unfrequently inducing a total retention,—in very rare cases suppression may ensue from the incapability of voiding the contents of the bladder. The latter frequently becomes very much distended, and not unfrequently loses in consequence its power of expelling the urine, becoming subject in fact to a species of palsy from the over-distension. In many cases it has been known to give way, causing the pouring out of the urine into the body, and fatal inflammation among the parts which are subject to that irritation.

When the inflammatory symptoms attending the gonorrhea have been subdued, and all the bad symptoms are removed, there sometimes remains a discharge from the urethra, of a pale yellow, greenish, or whitish colour, unaccompanied by pain, or scalding, or chordee, and lasting for an indefinite time—for months, sometimes for years. This discharge is called Gleet. It is also a frequent symptom of stricture.

Among the minor consequences of gonorrhea, we should not omit to mention Warts. They spring up round the gland and prepuce in great numbers. In some habits, they are always increased by, and often owe their origin, to want of cleanliness; they are accordingly found in all localities where that point is most neglected.





Another unpleasant consequence of gonorrhea, is Excoriation, which is an eruption of small vesicles around the corona of the gland, and between it and the foreskin, on the fold or reduplication of skin connecting them together. They break, leaving the membrane red and excoriated—hence the name of the disease. They may arise from any other irritation as well as that of gonorrhea. In this state the membrane of the gland and foreskin will pour out a purulent or muco-purulent discharge; and in some instances, where the foreskin is tightly contracted before the gland, it assumes the appearance of a clap, and is attended in such cases with very severe symptoms.

To the foregoing painful catalogue of symptoms might be added many others; for this dreadful malady frequently puts on the appearance of other disorders, and many unfortunate persons may labour for years under afflictions, originating from a venereal cause, mistaking them for gouty or bilious affections, rheumatic pains, palsies, convulsions, asthma, king's evil, leprosy, &c., all of which may arise from, or be connected with a venereal taint; for there is scarcely any distemper that has put on so many different shapes, or been attended with such a variety of symptoms; and if proper remedies be not timely obtained, the vital as well as the natural animal functions are depraved, the body becomes emaciated and unfit for action, and the unfortunate victim awaits with impatience the kind messenger, Death, to put a period to his miserable existence.

This disease has been described as one of the most surprising phenomena in the history of medicine, whether as regards the malignant inveteracy of its symptoms, or the singular mode in which it is produced and propagated. Its consequences travel out of the ordinary track of bodily ailment, covering the frame with disgusting evidences of its ruthless nature, and impregnating the wholesome stream of life with mortal poison. It conveys into families the seeds of disunion and unhappiness, undermining domestic harmony, and striking at the very soul of human intercourse.





We shall now proceed to give a brief description of the different species of these diseases as they arise in succession, with a general mode of treatment for the same; and we wish here to be understood, that in our description we have confined ourselves to the essential and most ordinary symptoms that usually appear, rather than those that may occasionally arise.



TREATMENT OF GONORRHEA, OR CLAP, &c.

In cases of gonorrhea, or clap, gleet, strictures, whites and all urethral discharges, irritation of the kidneys, bladder, urethra and prostate gland, Messrs. R. and L. Perry's Purifying Specific Pills, have proved to be the most effectual, safe, and speedy remedy.

As these disorders are sometimes violent, and attended with a variety of symptoms—such as buboes, ulcers, inflammations, &c, it will be necessary for the patient to be made acquainted with the nature of his complaint, which may sometimes require outward applications that may be had for a trifle from any druggist. They are pointed out in the following General Directions.



GONORRHEA, OR CLAP.

A virulent clap is an involuntary and constant discharge of corrupted mucus from the glands at the commencement of the urethra in men, or from the upper part of the vagina in women, and is caused by connexion with an infected person. The quantity of the discharge is in proportion to the degree of inflammation which is present, and its quality to the malignity of the infectious matter received in impure copulation. The first symptom of this disorder is generally uneasiness about the parts of generation, with titillation at the end of the penis; to this succeed the appearance of a little whitish matter at the orifice of the urethra, slight swelling, and sometimes a redness on the gland, 01 the head of the penis, and a trifling pungency on the evac





nation of the urine. The discharge soon increases; the inflammation at the orifice of the urethra becomes more palpable, and extends further down the canal; the parts begin to burn, and the evacuation of the urine is attended with a scalding heat which greatly torments the parts affected; besides which there is also a swelling of the lacunce or the mouths of the internal glands of the urethra, with a manifest and painful rigidity on the erection of the penis. They sometimes become indurated, and the seat of ulcers, and may be felt externally along the passage. The discharge still becomes more copious, grows thinner, loses its adhesiveness, and becomes of a yellowish, or rather a greenish complexion: the mouth of the penis begins to exhibit an increasing redness, the passing of the urine is accompanied by excruciating pain from the irritation of the urethra, and such general symptoms of inflammation, as to prevent the extension of the penis in erection, curving it downwards with agonizing torture, which is rendered still more intolerable if the member be raised towards the belly. The torture of this situation is greatly exaggerated by the influence of that inseparable stimulus which causes frequent erections of the diseased member, especially when warm in bed, attended with a degree of anguish which prevents sleep, or awakens the patient, if he have been fortunate enough to obtain a short relief from his sufferings by sleep, and not uncommonly produces involuntary emissions of the semen.

This is the usual type of the virulent gonorrhea, but all the diseases of this unhappy class are of a complicated and varied nature: they embrace in their consequences so many painful diseases, that we never consider them, however slight in appearance, as mere local effects, but always dread their approach to a constitutional character; for by a deplorable tendency, to which limit is unknown, the most trivial cases of these diseases, in their prolific energy, become the fruitful mine of a thousand discordant feelings and symptoms, that harass their devoted victim for an indefinite period: therefore we strongly recommend in all casea a i) immediate recourse to our applications, in order that the remedies may be effectively employed at their onset. In diseases of this kind, large evacuations of any kind are to be carefully guarded against; for in all the cases we have seen in which they have been used, they have done injury, by producing either irritability of the stomach or of the bowels, and thus rendering the system unequal to the retention of the necessary remedies.





The period at which the disease makes its appearance is generally from four to eight days after connexion: though in this there is no certain rule; for the symptoms will, with some individuals, discover themselves as early as twenty-four hours, and in other cases, although very rarely, not for some weeks.

The discharge in gonorrhea proceeds from the membrane lining the urethra, and from the lacunae, which are met with so numerously in the canal. In some we find it in small quantities, attended only by slight pain, while in others, the discharge is copious and the pain and chordee most severe. These various circumstances do not seem of themselves in any remarkable manner to influence the duration of the clap. In some a slight discharge will be easily removed in two or three days, while in others it will, independently of the use of our medicines, remain for several weeks. In cases too, where the discharge happens to be very free, we find the same uncertainty attends its removal, therefore no time should be lost in applying for relief.

When the inflammation is very severe, the glands immediately beneath the membrane of the urethra are sometimes rendered completely incapable of secreting, so that the discharge is then apparently checked. In severe inflammation affecting the mucous membrane of the nose or of the trachea, we find the same phenomena occur, and the first sign of this violent degree of action beginning to abate, is the return of the suppressed discharges.

It has been asserted that the longer the pain and discharge of clap continue, the farther the disease advances along the urethra, till it reaches the prostatic part of the canal, the caput gallinaginis, and even to the bladder itself, the mucous membrane of which may partake in the inflammatory action. To ascertain the progress the disease makes along the urethra, we may apply pressure along various parts thereof on the under surface of the penis, and observe whether, under such circumstances, the discharge flows in increased quantity from its orifice.





Suppuration and ulcer occur from neglect in the earlier stage of the disorder; or from an improper mode of treatment, engendering various other genital disorders, of which mention will be hereafter made. In fact, some medical practitioners of eminence have laid it down that neglect and maltreatment will mature gonorrhea into general syphilis; and that when the original symptoms are suffered to continue, or the infection is extremely virulent, chancres will form upon the gland or upon the foreskin of the penis; the mucus increases, and is discharged in larger quantities, tinging the linen with a yellow or greenish stain.

The duration of gonorrhea depends much on the constitution and regimen of the patient, but far more on the treatment to which it is submitted. Numerous examples have fallen under our notice of patients, who after labouring for three or four months under this malady, have in less than a fortnight after taking the Purifying Specific Pills, and Cordial Balm Of Syriacum, received the most effectual relief. This period is, in fact, amply sufficient for the cure of ten cases out of every twelve; and when the constitutionhas never been degraded by acquired or hereditary injuries, health and vigour are not unusually the immediate effects of a few days' care and attention.

The first stage of this disease in women, has been frequently mistaken by experienced persons for fluor albus, and has been treated as such; but the matter discharged in that complaint is larger in quantity, generally less yellow, and of a less consistent nature, than that which accompanies a virulent gonorrhea. Independently of this distinction, however, a venereal infection is attended with a peculiar heat, inflammation and pain, which are not the general concomitants of a white flux. It is to be admitted, however, that a vitiated case of fluor albus may bring on, by sexual intercourse^ a disease in men hardly to be equalled in severity, by the most obdurate gonorrhea.





In cases of gonorrhea or clap in both sexes, the patient must take two of Perry's Purifying Specific Pills at night and two in the morning, and one tea spoonful of the following mixture three times a day; it can be made up by any druggist:—





When the patient is particularly desirous for a speedy recovery, the addition of the Cordial Balm Of SyriAcum, in the proportion of one tablespoonful mixed with each dose of the above mixture will wonderfully facilitate and expedite the cure.

The bowels should be regularly acted on, but not violently. Immersing the penis in warm water will not only abate the symptoms, but also tend to keep it clean, an object of importance, and by which much future inconvenience may be avoided. Passing water also with the penis immersed in a basin of warm water, with a small quantity of laudanum in it, or some decoction of poppy heads will tend to relieve the distressing pricking and scalding experienced in the urethra, when micturation is practised. Excessive purging would be very hurtful, would produce debility, and keep up the discharge, by the local irritation it would produce, and thus by the effort of relaxation favouring absorption, accelerate the introduction of the contagion into the general system.

Should symptoms of inflammation appear, the Mixture ordered and the Cordial Balm Of Syriacum must be entirely discontinued until the inflammatory state is abated; and the bowels must be kept open by the following Senna mixture :—





Pour upon these ingredients one pint of boiling water, and let it stand for several hours in an oven, or on the hob of a fire-place: strain, and then add

Tincture of senna ... 4 ounces,

Sal volatile . . : . 2 drachms.



Dose—from three to four tablespoonsful every other morning fasting.



This mixture, which loses none of its virtue by keeping, if preserved in a well-stoppered bottk, we can recommend as a most valuable domestic medicine.



Where the patient is late in applying for assistance, and symptoms of strangury, or difficulty in making water have appeared, the secretion passing only in drops, with much pain, the inflammation must be subdued by the senna mixture, before any other plan is attempted; which then must be taken in doses of three table-spoonsful every morning. When the strangury is removed by the above means, then the plan formerly directed must be had recourse to.

During the progress of gonorrhea, attention to cleanliness cannot be too much recommended, by frequently washing the parts with warm milk-and-water, to prevent the acrimony of the discharge, which is apt to irritate the skin where it touches; to prevent this, it may also be proper to cover the point of the penis with a small bit of lint, to imbibe the discharge. Nor is regimen to be considered less necessary in the cure of gonorrhea than the other heads of treatment: every thing which heats and stimulates the body, increases the inflammation of the part and increases the discharge. A mild nutritious diet must be adopted, consisting chiefly of vegetable matter, puddings and other light dishes: and when animal food is used, it should be boiled and not partaken of freely. The drink should consist of weak lemonade, linseed tea, barley-water, or toast-and-water; wine, spirits, and malt liquors being especially avoided. The restriction of diet will be more necessary in the first stage than afterwards: as the symptoms of inflammation abate, the patient may indulge with a little more freedom, but he should still be cautious to avoid excess; for no disease is so apt to suffer from irregularities in this respect as gonorrhea. In enforcing regimen, some regard, however, must be paid to the habit and constitution of the person. When the habit is delicate and nervous, the restriction recommended would be apt to affect the general health, therefore it cannot be rigorously enforced: it must be left to the judgment of the patient what amount of comparative abstinence he can bear; and in these cases a due medium will be the best rule. Sexual intercourse is particularly prohibited.





In the progress of the disease When The Discharge

HAS BECOME THIN AND WATERY AND DEVOID OF PAIN

And Inflammation, the following injection may be used:

Acetate of lead .... 8 grains,

Sulphate of zinc .... 5 grains,

Rose water 8 ounces,

Tincture of opium ... 1 drachm,

Mix well together; a little to be put into a tea-cup, from which a syringe is to be filled and injected four times a day. In injecting, a finger should be applied on each side the orifice of the passage, to confine the point of the syringe, and prevent the fluid escaping; and after being retained a few seconds, the instrument is to be withdrawn. The urethra should also be compressed between the fore-finger and thumb of the left hand, near the root of the penis, to prevent the injection passing beyond the seat of the disease. The effects of the injection will shew the propriety of its use to the patient in a few days.

When the clap has been apparently cured, it not unfrequently leaves behind it, from the peculiar specific





character of the inflammation, a great degree of susceptibility to irritation, and a tendency to inflammation, which may be lighted up by the most trivial cause, and reproduce the disease in all its worst symptoms. It is therefore advisable that the use of the medicines already ordered should be persisted in for a considerable time after the disease has apparently entirely ceased.



A CHORDEE

Is a spasmodic contraction of the cavernous body of the penis and the frcenum or bridle of the member, by which the organ is bent down in the form of an arch; as if pulled with a cord. (See plate 7, fig. 3.)

The contraction is attended with the most excruciating pain, and is most severely felt when the patient is warm in bed. It is one of the symptoms of virulent gonorrhea, abating as the inflammation subsides, but sometimes it will continue after the heat and other virulent symptoms have disappeared.

Chordee is the result of the extension of the inflammation from the urethra to the surrounding structures, chiefly to the spongy and cavernous bodies, so that these bodies during erection are incapable of the necessary distension, without causing great pain by the pressure that is exerted in inflammation on the nerves of the parts affected. They are inflamed, tumid, and overloaded, and during erection, laceration of the network substance is by no means uncommon, by which hemorrhage is produced, and temporary relief follows.

If it should be troublesome, the most certain remedy is fifteen drops of laudanum in a wine glassful of water, which must be taken the last thing on going to bed: it must not be taken for more than two or three nights together, which will be found sufficient to remove this painful and unpleasant symptom.

After the pain and inflammation are abated, the running will gradually diminish, and, when the parts have had time to recover their natural strength, entirely disappear; the patient may then go into a cold bath every other day. The penis may now be kept clean with





cold water, when the discharge has become thick, sticky, and ropy, and can be pulled out in strings between the fingers, which are certain signs of the taint being subdued; in this case one tablespoonful of the Cordial Balm Of Syriacum, four times a day, in halfa-pint of cold water, will be highly beneficial, with two of the Purifying Specific Pills at night and two in the morning.

PHYMOSIS AND PARAPHYMOSIS.

When the gland of the yard is swelled and inflamed, the fomentation ordered for a swelled testicle will soon reduce it if used for half an hour together; after which a warm poultice of bread and milk must be applied. Sometimes the foreskin is so much swelled, that it cannot get back to uncover the nut: this is called a PhyMosis, and is to be treated as just mentioned. The patient should frequently endeavour to get the foreskin back very gently while using the fomentation, but even the least degree of force would be highly objectionable. When it goes back the parts affected should be smeared with the ointment ordered to disperse the swelled groin, afterwards letting the foreskin go over the nut again; this and the fomentation should be repeated several times a day, till the swelling and inflammation are subdued. Sometimes the foreskin swells and inflames behind the nut, and cannot be got over it; this is called a Paraphymosis, and requires the same treatment as Phymosis, always endeavouring to get the foreskin over the nut with the greatest gentleness, as the least force will be very injurious.

The Purifying Specific Pills must he taken two at night and two in the morning, and continued at least six weeks after all symptoms have disappeared. Leeches as sometimes necessary in these cases; if they are obdurate, it would be as well to apply six to the foreskin. (See plate 7, fig. 1 and 2.)

SWELLED TESTICLE

Is generally occasioned by great exercise, as jumping,





running, riding or walking too briskly, or by cold bathing while a clap continues, especially if it be very severe: or by exposing the private parts to cold more than necessary, or by drinking stimulating liquor; sometimes by strong purges. (See plate 7, fig. 4.)

When pain is first felt in the testicle, and when the epididymis begins to swell, the discharge from the urethra usually abates or entirely ceases, c.nd the inflammation in the testicle proceeds. A most exquisitely sensible pain is felt in the epididymis, particularly on its being touched, and it becomes hard. In some the testicle does not begin to swell till after the epididymis has become enlarged. The pain is then most intense, even when the testicle is at perfect rest, probably owing to the non-distensibility of the tunica albuginea, with which the testicle is invested. Although the scrotum seems enlarged upon the swelling of these bodies, yet it but seldom partakes in any great degree of active inflammation. After the swelling commences, the spermatic cord not unfrequently becomes similarly affected, and is also the seat of very great pain. The whole course of the cord is sometimes morbidly affected, and the pain is felt in the loins, and about the region of the kidneys. The patient is at length distressed with a continual gnawing pain in his back, and febrile symptoms affect him.

This symptom is a very frequent attendant on gonorrhea, particularly when severe bodily exercise, irregularity of living, or excess, have been indulged in, too strong, and irritating injections used, or the too liberal application of the bougie has been had recourse to. In some very irritable habits, from the commencement of gonorrhea, even moderate walking will occasion a swelled testicle. It is not so common for both testicles to swell at once, as for one to be first affected, and when it begins to recover, the other to be affected, and, in this way, unless under proper management, the disease is often protracted for several weeks.

A little attention may, on almost every occasion, prevent this symptom. Indeed, that it ever occurs, is perhaps more owing to inattention or bad treatment, than exclusively to the nature of the disease. On its first approach, the patient feels as if the testicle affected was, from time to time, in a state of slight motion, but this soon gives place to dull, heavy, burdensome pain, to which is soon added twitching darting sensations. It gradually, sometimes quickly, increases in size, and a throbbing sensation is felt in it, so that its suspension by a bandage becomes necessary.





This symptom, unless from improper treatment, seldom remains; but when the discharge entirely ceases, before the swelling has subsided, it often continues in the some condition for years, and sometimes for life. Permanent swelling of these glands, however, is more apt to be induced by causes, (such as external violence, &c.,) which do not occasion a discharge from the urethra, and those swellings very frequently continue for life.

It being the most painful and dangerous symptom attending the disease, the greatest care should be observed to remove it. The testicles should be supported or bound up with a linen truss or bandage; if the patient is of full habit of body, bleeding will be proper; the diet in this case should be as low as possible. No exercise whatever should be used, even sitting up is hurtful; it will be requisite to lie down as much as possible. The following fomentation will be requisite :—

Take of extract of lead a tablespoonful, vinegar four tablespoonsful, water a quart: shake them together and foment (as warm as the patient can bear with ease) the swelled parts with flannel frequently for some time together: after each time of fomenting, apply a warm poultice of bread and milk under the whole private parts, and take the Pills regularly. Should the swelling not go down, it will be then proper to apply eight or ten leeches to the testicles, and repeat them for two or three days; the Jomentatwns being freely applied after the leeches have fallen off.

If the patient in a previous gonorrhea has been troubled with this symptom, he should not neglect to keep the testicles supported while the clap continues, as the swelling is apt to return. If he cannot conveniently procure a linen truss, a slip of linen or handkerchief may be tied round the waist, and another brought un





derneath, so as to support it. Swelling of the testicles is most apt to occur rather late, about the second or third week of a neglected gonorrhea.



BUBOES OF SWELLING IN THE GROIN,

Occurring during the progress of gonorrhea, may be dispersed by rubbing well the size of a horse-bean, or half the size of a nut meg, of strong mercurial ointment, into the thigh, under the bubo four times a day, and taking the Purifying Specific Pills, two every night and two in the morning. They rarely suppurate. (See plate 6, fig. 2.)

GLEET.

A morbid or diseased excitement of the urethra may induce gleet, which consists in a discharge of mucous fluid from the urethra, attendeded with very little, if any pain. When the discharge owes its origin to causes which have no connexion with venereal disease, we distinguish it by the name of constitutional gleet, as will be subsequently shown. It is, however, more commonly a disease dependant on an ill-cured gonorrhoea, or is a sequence of that disorder, having lost its irritable malignity, becoming simple in its appearance, but of alarming consequence in its duration, because it may and does often induce seminal weakness and several other complaints; it is especially dangerous as being auxiliary to the formation of stricture of the urethra, a distressing complaint. The contagious properties which characterized the discharge of gonorrhea are still present in that of gleet, but are not quite so prominent.

Gleet will remain a chronic, or continual disease, for weeks, months, nay even years; and under the changes incident to habit and regimen, the symptoms will vary in severity, a circumstance which has not unfrequently led medical men into the error of supposing such changes to arise from fresh infection: in these cases the patient has over and over again submitted to the routine of pharmaceutical doubt, and not until his





uliUl ...





painful anxiety has become insupportable, has an appeal to further assistance extricated him from error, anguish, and uncertainty.

The discharge in gleet, however, is very much regulated by the habit and diet of the patient; if he is accustomed to indulge freely in the luxuries of the table and bottle, or in violent exercise, it will be increased both in quantity and acrimony; while on the other hand temperance and regularity of diet and exercise will materially assist the effects of our medicines, by gradually diminishing the discharge and ultimately relieving the patient of his long continued torment. Premature death has been the consequence of a neglected gleet; for it is a reasonable inference that the constant waste will exhaust and lead to an untimely extinction of the bodily faculties.

The secretion of true gleet is almost watery, combined with the mucus of the healthy portion of the urethra, but it will vary according to the excitement to which the parts are subjected. It may occasionally be accompanied with slight pain on making water, or during erection, but not necessarily so; and of course the more acute the symptoms, the nearer the approach to the puriform discharge, which characterises the gonorrheal disease in which it originates. If dependent on the existence of stricture, the connexion may be inferred previously to any examination of the canal, from the thin and ichorous nature of thedischarge, and from its being forced away by any muscular effort, as, for instance, during the evacuation of the bowels.

There is, obviously, no distinct boundary which points to the cessation of gonorrhea, and its termination in gleet; the change is often so gradual as to be imperceptible. If there be no narrowing of the urinary canal, if gleet appear to be the mere chronic subsidence of gonorrheal inflammation, then the judicious employment of astringent or slightly stimulant injections will be useful and necessary.'

The patient should abstain from all vegetables, acid. and sugar; he should rise early in the morning, take gentle exercise, use the cold bath, first plunging in the water over head and coming out- immediately, without





taking a second dip or remaining one moment in the water. The penis and testicles should be frequently washed in cold water.

Take half a tea spoonful of the mixture ordered for clap, mixed with one table spoonful of the Cordial Balm Of Syriacum at least four times a day, using the following injection, and taking one of the Purifying Specific Pills three times a day, till health is perfectly restored.

Obtain a syringe, and inject up the urinary passage the following injection three or four times a day:

Sulphate of Zinc ten grains, Rose Water four ounces, mixed together.

If this should cause any pain in the passage, it must be diluted with a little water.



MUCOUS GLEET.

This usually arises from causes independant of gonorrhea, and is characterised by peculiar symptoms,— the subject does not, therefore, fall under consideration in this part of the work, but may be found discussed in the first part "On Onanism, or Self Pollution." which treats on a variety of disorders arising from nervous debility and seminal weakness, which lead to the compromise, if not to the extinction, of sexual power: in these important and particular cases Messrs. Perry advise a personal interview, and as the facilities of communication with every part of the United Kingdom are so great, distance itself can now scarcely constitute an obstacle.



GONORRHEAL OPHTHALMIA, and CORYZA.

There can be no question, that ophthalmia, arising during an attack of gonorrhea, is, in every instance, produced by the matter being directly applied to the eyes, and not from metastasis of the disease, as has been ridiculously asserted. Patients are too often very careless of these matters. They ought at all times, immediately





after touching the affected parts, to wash their hands with soap and water; and never use the same cloths or sponges for the organs of generation, and the eyes, nose, etc.

Gonorrheal ophthalmia is certainly one of the most acute, inflammatory, painful, and destructive affections which, perhaps, occurs in the whole range either of the practice of physic or surgery. No acute disease can equal it for rapidity, torture, and destruction. It not unfrequently, if not treated very early in the attack, absolutely in the onset, will destroy the eyes, so as to render them totally useless as organs of vision in three or four days.

The disease commences with a slight degree of redness of the membrane lining the eyelids, which soon extends to the eye itself, the conjunctiva becoming swollen and very red, so as to overlap the cornea and compress it greatly. The eyelids are tumefied, so as to render it difficult to separate them, and every part of the membrane pours out a highly contagious discharge, a single drop of which is sufficient to produce the disease in another person, if applied to the eye. The constitutional symptoms make equal progress; fever runs high, and the patient is in a state of great bodily and mental excitement. In this disease early application for surgical assistance is indispensably necessary.

A similar state of things may affect the nose; the disease is then known by the name of gonorrheal coryza. Both the complaints are well represented in plate 12, fig. 2.



STRICTURE.

Stricture is a disease that obstructs the free passage of the urine, and causes it either to come in a small forked or twisted stream, or drop by drop, with considerable pain: if the urethral canal be not much diminished in calibre by the stricture, it may exist many years without producing any great degree of inconvenience; but though this may be the case respecting the evacuation of the urine, we are led to conceive that





the semen, in consequence, in the action of coition may not properly be directed into the vagina; for not issuing at the moment of ejaculation from the urethra, it afterwards falls merely by the effects of its specific gravity: of course attention to this stage of the disease becomes requisite; and more particularly in the advanced period of life, as the power by which the urine is evacuated, and the semen ejected necessarily becomes weaker.

Although stricture may arise from constitutional causes, from malformation or spasm, or from other accidental circumstances, the cure of which must depend upon minute reference to the particular cause, yet the source of this distressing complaint, in nineteen cases out of twenty, is to be traced to venereal disease, or to an improper method of treating gonorrhea. We may look upon the inflammation of gonorrhea, (after it has continued a long time,) as producing a new action in the vessels of the urethra at a particular point, by which a sort of membranous band is formed round the internal urethra, the circle of which being hard, and situated within the natural space is denominated a stricture. It may be considered that the urethra being hollow, muscular, and membranous, and naturally predisposed to contraction, is readily affected by inflammation or violence of any kind; but the progress of stricture is variable in different habits. Tropical climate, sedentary pursuits, excessive indulgence in—or unnaturally protracted—sexual intercourse, are sometimes the causes of stricture; and in irritable habits will excite the disease, without the intervention of any venereal complaint.

Spasmodic stricture is generally seated at the neck of the bladder or on the membranous part of the urethra. It may occur to persons in good health from exposure to wet and cold, from derangement of the organs of digestion, from long retention of urine, particularly when walking (owing to the absence of public urinals,) or to violent horse exercise: but more frequently does it happen to those young men, who, when suffering from gleet or gonorrhea imperfectly or only partially cured, are tempted to commit an excess in Tine, spirits, and other strong drinks. Surrounded by jovial society, glassful after glassful is swallowed, each one to be the last. The patient, with his bladder full to repletion, scarcely able to retain his water, yet, probably "going" every moment, represses his desire until the party breaks up, when, on encountering the cold air he finds himself unable to void even a drop, or if so only with extreme difficulty. The greater the effort and the more determined the straining, the greater is the impossibility; and unless relief be speedily afforded, the most alarming consequences may ensue.





Notwithstanding the danger attendant upon a neglected or severe case of spasmodic stricture, when judiciously treated none need be apprehended. The patient should instantly send for a surgeon to draw off the urine—there will seldom be any difficulty in passing the catheter, especially if the operator be not too hasty, and be at all dexterous in the use of his instrument. Force should never be employed: but as this devolves on the surgeon, the patient need be under no apprehension; a constant use of the CorDial Balm Of Syriacum And Purifying Specific Pills, for a few weeks subsequently, will remove this unpleasant disorder.

The formation of a permanent stricture has been attributed to various causes; most of these have been already enumerated; there is one however not yet mentioned, which is popularly but erroneously considered to be a most efficient cause*—namely, the use of astringent injections in the treatment of gonorrhea and gleet. The origin of this opinion may be readily traced to the fact that permanent stricture invariably depends on the results of inflammation in the deposition of lymph in the cellular tissue surrounding that part of the urethra where the contraction is found, and as gonorrhea is in itself a peculiar form of inflammation, from which persons labouring under stricture have generally previously suffered, and as generally the disease has been neglected, injections being had recourse to ultimately to remove a long standing effect, persons have been apt to attribute to the remedy, that which is in reality only due to the disease for which the remedy was used.





Permanent stricture is characterised by a difficulty which is constantly experienced in the discharge of the urine, which comes away at first in a stream diminished in size, then forked or twisted, something like a corkscrew in shape, and afterwards, as the disease becomes more severe and the stricture more contracted, it is discharged only by a few drops at a time, and that too with excessive pain and difficulty. Occasionally the presence of a stricture is attended with a constant dribbling away of the urine, which apparently nothing can prevent. The canal of the urethra is the seat of considerable irritation, and a gleety discharge is generally met with. There may be one, two, or more strictures in the course of the canal, and sometimes the third lobe of the prostate becomes enlarged, the disease having extended nearly to the bladder.

If the stricture be allowed to continue unchecked, the canal of the urethra will enlarge behind it; forming a sinus in which the urine collects, and exciting inflammation and ulceration; the urethra itself finally bursts, allowing the urine to escape into the pelvis and the cellular tissue of the perineum, where it causes great inflammation, abscesses, and even gangrene. All this while the disease is attended with considerable fever, and the patient's life is placed in great jeopardy. Nor does the bladder escape; subacute inflammation of its mucous membrane is set up—a mucous glairy secretion is poured forth in great quantity, the urine becomes ammoniacal, and offensive, and the kidneys soon partake in the disorder, becoming the seat of inflammation, with dilatation of their tubes and pelves, and ultimately suppuration sets in, which in a period more or less prolonged, according to the intensity of the disease, and the state of constitution of the patient, terminates the existence of the unfortunate sufferer.

In the treatment of this severe disease, constitutional remedies must be employed, and surgical applications also had recourse to. The use of the bougie is indispensably necessary—in addition to which balsam' medicines must be given internally, conjoined with the same plan of proceeding recommended in cases of spasmodic stricture. (See plates, 8 and 9.)





INCIDENTAL DISEASES.

There are many other complaints to which the urinary as well as generative parts are subject, viz, Fistula, Disease of the Prostate Gland, and some other affections of the Testicle, Bladder, Sfc: but as to enumerate them would only be to swell these pages, we have contented ourselves with mentioning those only which are most important, and of most general occurrence. If, however, the patient should find any symptoms of disorder not previously or hereafter enumerated, he should, without delay, describe minutely the symptoms, referring them (as far as he is competent) to the proper sources; no time should in any case be lost, as changes go on very rapidly, and the views of a just practitioner being always directed to the protection of nature, he should have an opportunity of preventing the intrusion of disease upon one of her most important systems.

When the organs of generation are infested with pediculi or crab-lice, the most efficacious and agreeable remedy is the application of strong mercurial ointment, which must be well rubbed on the parts. Such a practice is seldom ineffectual: even powdering them with calomel, will at once destroy the insect, and thereby remove the itching. The Purifying Specific Pills, and Cordial Balm Of Syriacum, should be taken according to the 'General Directions:' two Purifying Specific Pills at night and one in the morning, and one tablespoonful of the Balm of Syriacum four times a day, and continued for some time in order to purify the blood.

VENEREAL CONTAMINATION

If not at first eradicated will often remain secretly lurking in the system for years, and, although for a while undiscovered, at length break out upon the unhappy sufferer in its most dreadful forms, or else unseen internally endanger the very vital organs of existence.





To those who are suffering from the consequences which this disease may have left behind it in the system in the form of Secondary Symptoms, Erup

TIONS OF THE SKIN, SCURVY, SCROFULA, BLOTCHES ON THE HEAD AND FACE, VENEREAL ULCERATIONS, AND ENLARGEMENT OF THE THROAT AND TONSILS, NODES ON THE SHIN BONES, THREATENED DESTRUCTION OF THE NOSE AND PALATE, OR ANY OF THOSE PAINFUL AFFECTIONS ARISING FROM THE INDISCRIMINATE USE OF MERCURY,

MESSRS. PERRY'S CONCENTRATED DETERSIVE ESSENCE,

AN ANTI-SYPHILITIC REMEDY,

Is strongly recommended; its use will be found to be attended with the most astonishing effects; it cleanses the blood, and searching out and removing the impurities by which it is contaminated, checks the ravages of the disorder, and effectually re-establishes and re-invigorates the health of the constitution.



Price lis. or four Bottles in one for 33s. by which lis. will be saved, also in £5. cases, which saves £1. 12s.

Independent of which the patient is entitled to the Jull benefit and advantage of securing Messrs. R. fy L. Perry's advice, without the usual consultation fee, this being applicable only to those who remit £&. for a packet. The patient is requested to be as minute as possible in the description of the case, when the medicines will be immediately forwarded.

PREPARED ONLY BY

MESSRS. R. AND L. PERRY AND CO.,

SURGEONS,

19 BERNERS STREET, OXFORD STREET,

LONDON.



Observe the signature impressed in a stamp on the outside of each wrapper, and the name and address of the proprietors blown in each bottle.

May be had of all Patent Medicine Vendors in Town and Country throughout the United Kingdom, the Continent of Europe and America





GENERAL DIRECTIONS

FOR TAKING THE

CONCENTRATED DETERSIVE ESSENCE.



Three tea-spoonsful to be taken three times a day, in a little cold water, and in urgent cases the dose may be increased to four tea-spoonsful three times a day; if it should operate much by stool, the dose must be lessened, or it should be taken less frequently.



During the use of this medicine, if the patient catch cold, a tenderness of the mouth and gums will sometimes happen; this may be removed by taking a tea-spoonful of flour of brimstone, mixed with treacle, night and morning, till the mouth is cured; or else, a dose of salts, or twenty grains of jalap, may be taken night and morning, while the tenderness of the mouth continues. If the patient at this period be rubbing in any ointment, its use must also be discontinued; when the mouth and gums are well, the ConcentraTed Detersive Essence must be again taken, and the use of the brimstone abandoned.





IMPORTANT OBSERVATIONS

ON THE USE OF

THE CONCENTRATED DETERSIVE ESSENCE.



THIS MEDICINE, FROM ITS PECULIAR PROPERTIES,



SUFFICIENT TO EFFECT A PERFECT CURE

OF THE HOST

INVETERATE AND OBSTINATE FORMS



THE VENEREAL DISEASE,

Its active principles are transmitted by the medium of the circulating fluid throughout the entire frame, and even penetrate the more minute vessels, removing and expelling in its course all corruptions and impurities from the vital stream, so as altogether to eradicate the virus of disease, and expel it with the insensible perspiration through the medium of the pores of the skin and urine.



SECONDARY SYMPTOMS,

CHANCRES, BUBOES, VENEREAL SORES OF EVERY DES-

CRIPTION, SORE THROAT, SCURVY, OLD WOUNDS,

ULCERS, SORE LEGS, SCORBUTIC OR SCROFULOUS HUMORS,

ERYSIPILAS, FISTULA OR PILES, LEPROSY,

ERUPTIONS ON THE LIPS, HE.AD, AND FACE,

AND ALL OTHER CUTANEOUS ERUPTIONS ARE UNDER

ITS IMMEDIATE INFLUENCE.





In all cases, The Cordial Balm of Syriaeum should be used for some time after the cure has taken place, in order to cleanse, strengthen, and renovate the system from the natural debility and consequences attending affections of the above description.





SYPHILIS OR POX, AND SECONDARY

SYMPTOMS.



Syphilis or Pox is another and more violent form of the Venereal Disease, and is divided into two forms, the primary and secondary. The former consists of a chancre or ulcer, which forms on the foreskin and gland of the penis, of an irritated and red appearance, which gradually spreads, and if not speedily arrested, ends in the total destruction of the penis. After the disease has appeared in the form of a chancre, in a few days a bubo or abscess of the groin follows, which inflames, enlarges, suppurates and bursts, when a quantity of matter escapes. In severe cases, instances have occurred where the abscess has extended to deep parts and exposed the femoral artery, which has ulcerated, and the patient, from want of timely assistance, has bled to death. The constitution ultimately becomes affected, and hence arises what are called secondary symptoms, which at first affect the nose and throat, secondly the skin and the surface of the body, and lastly the bones.— (See plate 10, fig. 1.)

When the venereal virus attacks the throat or palate, the membrane of the roof of the mouth becomes red and inflamed, a pimple forms upon it, which opens, ulcerates, and exposes the bony palate, which may be felt by the probe: this is the first stage. The exposed bone soon exfoliates, and a communication is thereby formed between the mouth and nose, and fluids return through it, the voice being changed into a nasal twang and a most offensive discharge secreted.

When the tonsils are attacked, ulcers appear precisely similar in character to chancres—hollow in the centre, with raised ragged edges, yellow on the surface, with a livid colour on the surrounding margin. A sense of dryness is perceived extending up the Eustachian tube to the ear, and the patient occasionally becomes deaf, by the extension of the disease to the tubes, and the ravages which it there commits. Sometimes the tongue is attacked. Extending its course, it next attacks the larynx, or the top of the windpipe, when if not arrested it will soon destroy life. Attending the affection of the larynx, there is always loss of voice; the patient speaks in a low whisper. It is more fatal than any other form of the venereal disease.





The mucous membrane of the nose stands next in order, as subject to the influence of Syphilis. The patient's attention is first directed to it by an incrustation which forms on the nostril. On this being removed, a quantity of blood mixed with purulent matter is discharged, which frequently lays bare the bone, and occasions it to exfoliate, and horrible deformity is the result; this is illustrated by the Plate (No. 10, fig. 2,) recently drawn from a case under the Care Of Messrs. Perry.

CHANCRES, OR ULCERS.

The first appearance of syphilis is commonly in the form of a chancre on the gland of the penis, or on the foreskin, in men—and in the labia pudendi, or nymphos, in women. It will appear in other parts, however, as the back of the penis, and on the scrotum in men; and the perineum of women will sometimes be the seat of the disease—(See plate 6, fig. 1.)

The precursor of chancre is a slight inflammation, followed by a little pimple; this gradually exposes a small pustule, the fluid in which is first transparent, then white; it breaks, and a small but spreading ulcer is formed, sometimes painful—generally sore; it has hard protuberent ash-colour edges, covered with a white slough, and is difficult of cure. It seldom happens that there is more than one chancre, although instances occur where there are two, three, or four—(See plate 7, fig. 5.)

When a chancre or sore is perceived on the yard, the Concentrated Detersive Essence must be taken in doses of three tea-spoonsful three times a day, in a little pure cold water, and when they are healed, the Cordial Balm Of Syriacum should be taken according to the General Directions for at least one month. It will be proper to dress the chancres three times a





day with the following wash, which may be prepared at any druggist's :—

Calomel .... 1 scruple,

Lime-waler . . .3 ounces. Mix.



Always before the sores are dressed, the matter must be wiped clean off with a bit of lint, the ulcer being afterwards washed with warm water; dip the whole penis in a basin of water for a minute, then take off the moisture with a piece of linen rag, and apply the black wash on a piece of linen or lint, to be kept wetted as much as possible.

Where at the expiration of a week, the chancre neither recedes nor advances, discontinue the black wash, and use the blue wash as underneath: should the pain be very great in applying it, it may be diluted with a little water :—

Sulphate of Copper . . 3 grains,

Camphor . . . .3 grains,

Destilled Water . . .1 ounce.

Mix and strain.



When the chancre is situated under the prepuce, or foreskin, and the latter covering is so inflamed and swollen as to prevent its being drawn back to exhibit the sore, the discharge should be carefully washed out by any of the lotions already recommended, by means of a syringe, several times in the twenty-four hours. Much good is often done by varying the local remedies, occasionally filling up the ulcer with blue ointment, or in fact any substance which will alter the morbid action of the parts; but, as a general rule, these lotions will be found sufficient if their use be duly persevered in.

If a Bubo should not have risen much, it may be dispersed by rubbing into the thickest part of the thigh, under the bubo, the size of a large horsebean of the following ointment, for ten or fifteen minutes ever night and morning: the Concentrated Detersive Essence being taken regularly for a fortnight or for a longer time, according to the directions previously given after it is dispersed :—





Of strong mercurial ointment half an ounce, extract of lead thirty drops, mix them well together.

If it should not decrease by this method, let it come to a head by discontinuing the ointment. A warm poultice of bread and milk applied two or three times a day, will tend to hasten the suppuration, and produce ease. When it is sufficiently ripe, it will burst of itself: then gently press out the matter, and endeavour to enlarge the orifice by distending the skin, put a warm poultice over it, or foment it with warm water, and apply a little mercurial ointment, spread on lint, to the opening twice a day. Always before it is dressed, press the matter out with great care and gentleness, and wipe it very clean. The same poultice must never be used but once in any case. The poultice need only be used for a few days after it bursts; or, if it be not convenient to apply poultices, four or five folds of clean linen may be put over in its stead, first applying the ointment. If proud flesh sprout up, a little Red Precipitate mixed with the ointment will consume it. After it has been open about a fortnight a little of the ointment ordered to disperse the swelling may be used to heal it. The Concentrated Detersive Essence must be taken during the time as follows; three tea-spoonsful three times a day, in a little pure water, and should this not relieve the symptoms quickly, the dose must be increased to four tea-spoonsful three times a day. The patient has only to follow the directions and take the Essence, and he may rely on obtaining a perfect restoration to health, as it has never been known to fail in effecting a cure, however severe the symptoms may be

After the bubo has discharged its contents, the strength should be supported, an improved diet allowed, port or other wines may be taken, and the Cordial Balm Of Sykiacum, taken regularly in doses of onetable-spoonful four times a day.





WARTS.

A wart may be very properly considered a disease of the papillae of the skin, covered with a diseased cuticle, commonly of a cylindrical shape. It appears on the foreskin and gland of the penis, in men; on the labia pudendi, in the angle between the labia and the inner part of the thigh, and about the perineum in women, and also about the anus in both sexes.

Warts follow chancres, and sometimes gonorrhea, but frequently appear without local symptoms: the injudicious use of violent remedies often produces ulceration, and sometimes malignant growths.

The warts should be freqttenlly smeared with a feather or hair pencil, with the following lotion:—

Nitrate of Silver ... 1 scruple.

Destilled Water ... 1 ounce.



Mix and strain.

Or bathed with the following :—

Tormentil Root.... J ounce.

Boiling Water .... 3 ounces.



Boiled together to two ounces, and strained.



VENEREAL ERUPTIONS OF THE FACE AND SKIN.

These eruptive diseases are the production of a specific irritation, or a peculiar disposition of the constitution, which sooner or later gives rise to a series of obscure phenomena, singular in their character, and very tedious in their cure, repeatedly disappearing and returning. They make the skin thick, rough, and unequal; the countenance acquires a livid hue; and the whole face exhibits an unnatural and unpleasing aspect, being sometimes covered with spots of a reddish, brownish, or copper colour, spreading on the forehead and chest, and between the shoulders, and even extending their





action to the palms of the hand: the breath becomes offensive; and the teeth also suffer. The general appearance of the eruption is that of hard scorbutic spots, about the size of spangles, of a livid, brown, or copper cast, only occasionally raised above the skin: the diseased surface, soon after their appearance, becomes very rough, and white scales fall off, leaving a slight pit where they had previously been.

The manner of the eruption occasionally varies; and instead of displaying this kind of character, we find the face and nose covered with real pimples, tetters, and sebaceous concretions, which in their progress, become very troublesome, and often suppurate; they continue to display, to the great annoyance of the individual, this kind of indefinite action for a great length of time; even the larger spots occasionally continue to pit, till the pit loses its covering, and degenerates into an actual ulcer, discharging a thin acrid matter mixed with blood; at other periods it throws out ragged watery excrescences, with itching, and even deep scaly ulceration. With these appearances the face has been known to be completely covered: (See plate 11, figs. 1 & 2.) and not only is the breath offensive, but the other excretions become also affected by this putrid action, and exhale a very unpleasant effluvia. Prior to the re-appearance of these eruptions, scales, and discolorations, the individual is frequently sick and faint. There is an unaccountable langour and depression of spirits—prostration of strength—restless nights, pain in the various bones, or rather a sort of tightness and aching sensation, as if they were bound with a cord. Although about this period the bones are evidently affected, the pain is never so acute as in confirmed venereal affections principally affecting these parts.

From the sensations experienced by the patient, the pain about this time seems rather lodged about the external surface than in the body of the bone. Sleep yields neither comfort nor refreshment—a disagreeable sensation pervades the body, which is almost always accompanied by emaciation.

It will be necessary to avoid warm liquids, to dress coolly- and lightly, and to take moderate exercise in the open air with nourishing diet.





The Concentrated Detersive Essence must be taken regularly, according to the General Directions, and a half-pint of the following decoction morning and afternoon until the eruptions have entirely disappeared:—

Take of Sarsaparilla four ounces, of water two quarts, boil it down to three pints, and strain it off for use; the addition of two table-spoonsful of the Cordial Balm Op Striacum to each dose of the Sarsaparilla, will assist nature in producing a re-action and re-invigoration of the system, purifying the blood in its general circulation at the same time, and greatly facilitate the cure.

When the venereal eruptions are dry and scaly, the following lotion must be applied twice a day—

Oxymuriate of Mercury . . 2 grains,

Muriatic Acid .... 4 drops,

Emulsion of Bitter Almonds . 7J ounces,

Simple Spirits of Lavender . 2 drachms.



VENEREAL SORE THROAT

Begins with little or no pain: at first there is felt only a slight pricking or irritation, sometimes merely amounting to an uncomfortable sensation, on swallowing food: when the throat is examined, ulceration is perceptible, the ulcers presenting a particular appearance: they are of a conical shape, often of considerable depth, and generally attack that part of the throat called the almonds or tonsils: on each side they are covered with a foul crust of thick white matter resembling hog's lard, or rather of a cheeselike appearance: their effects, in the end, are, to produce hoarseness, fetid breath, &c.

Besides the throat, every part of the mouth may occasionally be the seat of venereal ulcers, though they are most frequent on the palate or the tongue. A deep copper-coloured spot, somewhere between the pap and middle of the palate, is the first appearance: this spot at last becomes ulcerated, and advances rapidly, both in breadth and depth. (See plate 12, fig. 1.) The cure of venereal sore throat is only to be accomplished by the proper and gradual administration of the Concentrated Detersive Essence, in doses of three tea-spoonsful night and morning in a little water, which should be continued until the throat is quite well; after which the Cordial Balm Of Syriacum should be taken for at least two months, but to assist their operation, check the progress of the ulceration, and prevent its destroying the soft palate, it is necessary to make direct applications to the throat, in the form of a gargle; of which the following will be found one of the most successful:—





Tincture of Cayenne Pepper . 30 drops,

Muriatic Acid . . . .15 drops,

Infusion of Roses .... 6 ounces.



The throat to be gargled three or four times a day; care should be taken that none of the liquid pass down the throat.



AFFECTIONS OF THE BONES.

Affections of the bones in syphilis, (occurring after the primary symptoms have disappeared,) are often mistaken for rheumatism, gout, lumbago, and are often the indication of the continuance of the action of the syphilitic poison or virus, not merely after the healing of local sores, but even after ulceration in the throat and eruptive blotches upon the skin have entirely passed away. It would seem that there is an order of parts mostly but not always attacked in successio , of which the solid structure of the bones, as well as the fibrous investment, are usually the last to suffer.

The symptoms which mark the disease are as follows :—The patient experiences in the evening a sensation of dull aching, wearing pain in the bones, which is afterwards the seat of the node. In the course of a few days a swelling appears in the evening, which disappears again on the following morning; it is excessively painful and tender at night, but in the morning it is hardly perceptible, and the tenderness is almost gone. At this particular period the periosteum is also affected; but when the inflammation has continued some time longer, the bone is diseased and becomes enlarged. The long bones are the parts generally affected, when nodes are formed, such as the shin bone and the clavicle. They are sometimes formed on the skull, and there, as in some other instances, the poisonous inflammation soon leads to unhealthy action, and death of the bones by suppuration or exfoliation.





The following treatment should be resorted to :— Three tea-spoonsful of the Concentrated DeterSive Essence in a wine-glassful of water twice a day, and bathe the parts affected frequently with the following embrocation:—

Sulphuric Ether .... 1 ounce,

Compound Camphor Liniment . 1 ounce,

Acetate of Morphia .... 2 grains.



VENEREAL ULCERS AND SORES

Must be dressed frequently with the black wash ordered for chancres, or, if more convenient, the ointment prescribed for buboes may be applied, either of its full strength, or diluted with an equal quantity of lard, on a little lint twice a day.

In the use of all these local applications to syphilitic eruptions, it should be borne in mind that they are but of secondary utility; for without the Concentrated Detersive Essence the applications are next to useless.

Venereal infection may be conveyed to the embryo infant, which in such case is said to be hereditarily affected; these infants, at their birth, or at an early period,exhibit symptoms which, in their progress, present all the apparent characters of syphilitic disease: some are covered with dark copper colored specks and spots about various parts of the organs of generation: some are excoriated, and have small angry-looking but not deep-seated ulcerations: others are troubled with ulcers about the mouth, lips, and nose: the eyes are affected with a muco-purulent discharge ; the ears suffer, &c.: in fact, it is not one organ which suffers, but the whole system: the child snuffles very much in breathing, is fretful and weakly, wasting daily; day after day its cheeks become more pallid, and it looks anything but healthy, suffering in its stomach, bowels, and the alimentary canal generally; the mesenteric glands, the lungs, the liver, all become deranged; no part or organ performs its functions with energy; and the animal system is totally out of order: the child, it is true, lives, but lives to misery and increased disease. If the animal strength be sufficient to conquer these affections, and the child struggle through the period of infancy, then the disease retreats into its lingering and chronic type; and should this sweeping leviathan pass over the lungs, mesentery, and the internal viscera, with their tributary dependencies, it then fixes with Goliath strength on the spine, and assumes its not less certain but more modulated character of scrofula.





Thus this dreadful malady passes from one stage to another, till the unhappy sufferer, weakened and wearied by such repeated and incessant attacks, falls, in the prime of age and intellect, the victim of its parent's error.

To persons entering upon the responsibilities of matrimony, and who have ever had the misfortune during their more youthful days to become affected by any form of these diseases, a previous course of the ConCentrated Detersive Essence is highly essential and of the greatest importance, as more serious afflictions are visited upon an innocent wife and offspring from a want of these simple precautions, than perhaps half the world is aware of; for, it must be remembered, "where the fountain is polluted, the streams that flow from it cannot be pure."

CLEANLINESS.

Throughout the whole treatment of every species of venereal complaints, a strict observance of cleanliness, ought to be our first and constant object. Without this, we have not only to bear with the filthiness, naturally arising from such complaints; but it has been believed, that the absorption of matter which, on such occasions, must take place, greatly aggravates the very disease for the removal of which our remedies are applied.





OBSERVATIONS

ON THE EFFECTS OF MERCURY,

WHEN EMPLOYED

IN THE

TREATMENT OF SYPHILIS OR POX,

WITH DIRECTIONS FOR PROPER TREATMENT.



Of all the disorders of the human frame, there is none which has baffled the skill of medical men more than Syphilis; and when we look to the general treatment of this disease in all its various forms, we cannot but deplore the great loss of life, which is daily occuring from the use of that deadly poison, Mercury, whieh is constantly administered by medical men, in cases of the venereal disease; the blood in the system is poisoned, and by being so, it conveys, wherever it travels in the arteries and veins, the seeds of disease. The blood thus poisoned goes to the heart, and diseases of this organ are the consequence: it goes to the lungs, and these organs become morbidly deranged: in fact, to whatever organ it travels, there it lays the foundation of disease. In cases like these, it has hitherto been the custom of the faculty, not to rid the system of the poison which is destroying the unhappy suffer by inches, and preying upon his vitals, but they have pursued a course of treatment as incorrect with sound theory, as it is repugnant to humanity and common sense.

One would naturally suppose that some drug would be administered to counteract the effects of the poison circulating in the veins. Not so! Instead of so doing, other poisons have been thrown into the system, in the shape of mercury, arsenic, and other mineral poisons. And what are the consequences of this unnatural and inhuman mode of treatment? The unfortunate being has caries of his bones, copper coloured eruptions make their appearance all over his body, with running sores in the neck, and distorted features. (See plate 13, fig. 1 and 2.)





Yes, the rotten skulls which are to be found in the anatomical museums—with all the other beautiful specimens of diseased bones which in. our younger days were so abundant in hospitals, in the great majority of cases were the production of long and harassing courses of mercury. The rash, indiscriminate, and unqualified use of Mercury has been productive of infinite mischief. Under the notion of its being an antidote, the untutored think they have only to saturate the system with mercury, and the business is accomplished. Fatal error! Thousands are annually either mercurialized out of existence, or their constitutions so broken and the functions of nature so impaired, as to render the residue of life miserable.

The disorder which we have in view, owes its fatal results either to neglect or ignorance. In the first stage it is always local, and easy to be extinguished, without the slightest injury to the constitution; but when neglected or improperly treated, a mere local affection may be converted into an incurable and fatal malady. What a pity that a young man, the hope of his country and the darling of his parents, should be snatched from all the prospects and enjoyments of life by the consequences of one unguarded moment, and by a disease which is not, in its own nature fatal, and which never proves so if properly treated! To do ample justice to the case a man must devote his entire attention to investigate diseases, to detect their occult indications, and promptly to apply a safe and radical remedy. But, to prevent all the dangerous consequences emanating from the dregs of this disease lingering in the constitution, and to eradicate them when present, the Concentrated Detersive Essence offers a certain remedy. Many valuable lives have been preserved by it, and many painful sufferings relieved, when all other means have failed; in fact, so beneficial have been its effects in these cases, that, to do justice to the medicine as well as the patient, it





becomes a duty to declare it, and make its virtues known. It must be understood, that to accomplish such an invaluable object has not been the mere result of chance or fancy, but the reward of long and unwearied research, not alone into the disease for which this medicinil discovery is so aptly applicable, and those causes which give rise to it, but also of deep enquiry, experiment, and observation of those chemical substances capable, by their peculiar mode of action, of overcoming these causes. No schemes or theories can be brought to perfection in the study only;—reflection may bring forth the idea, but practice alone can prove its efficacy. Nothing speaks louder, in the treatment of disease, of the advantages to be derived from the powers of any particular medicine, than that grand test, experience. The joyful news of health, ease, and comfort, spread far and wide from those who have fortunately found it, while the truth prevails by its own excellence;

Magna est Veritas, et prevalebit,

and hence will be proved the beneficial operations and results of this discovery, which needs only be made known to the world to claim its just reward, and demon strate its utility and value.

But it is necessary to state, that it will be in vain to expect relief from this remedy without punctuality; for taking a dose or two properly, then leaving off for some days and beginning again, will be of no service. The doses must be taken regularly.

Patients who reside in the country, at whatever distance, can have the remedies applicable for their several disorders, forwarded to any part of the United Kingdom, carefully secured in a portable compass, and in every respect ready for convenient use. They are requested to be as minute as possible in the detail of their cases, as to the duration of the complaint, the symptoms, age, habits of living, and general occupation.





PERRY'S

PREVENTATIVE LOTION.





The details contained in the preceding chapter respecting the causes, nature, symptoms, and progress of the various forms of the venereal disease, will sufficiently explain why these maladies are held in such dread and horror by most persons, that rather than incur the risk of contagion from impure copulation, they prefer the certainty of the evils, both bodily and mental, which inevitably follow sooner or later the practice of selfpollution.

There cannot exist a doubt in the minds of all right thinking men, that youths, from the dread of contagion and the family quarrels that might arise therefrom, as well as being led away by bad advice and evil example, are prone to exercise the functions of nature, and to gratify the passions which the period of puberty awakens into life, by yielding to the insidious advice of the tempter, and practising a crime which, as we have already fully shewn, is condemned alike by God and man, and which will assuredly bring in its train, a long series of diseases and wretchedness both of mind and body, and ultimately induce premature old age, decay, and an early and miserable termination to existence.

Young men who have attained the adult period of life, may in many instances avoid the (supposed) necessity for the commission of this sin, by entering into the marriage state. But although this is a

"Consummation most devoutly to be wished;"

yet it is not one that every person is either prepared or able to adopt. Pecuniary circumstances may interfere; a young man may be fully capable of supporting himself in comfort, or he may be ready to rough it for himself, while he would naturally feel very unwilling to plunge another, and that an affectionate and beloved wife, into the endurance of the discomforts which to him are nothing, but to a female tenderly and carefully brought up, would be a source of constant annoyance, despite the care and affection she would experience from her husband. Many young men, again, hold back from matrimony, from the fear of having a large family at a too early an age; others again are prevented by family reasons: in short it would be almost an endless task to enumerate all the reasons which keep the young men of the present day, in the forlorn condition of bachelors.





What then is to become of them; are they to endure the excitement of their passions by the natural distended condition of the seed-reservoirs and of the seedbearing vessels, the testicles meanwhile continually pouring out more semen,—are they, we say, to be in this distressing state of re-iterated excitement, and seek to control their passions by moral axioms and dark sayings of old—knowing as they must do all the while that moderate enjoyment of sexual intercourse—mind we say expressly, moderate enjoyment—is alike beneficial to the power of the body and mind—are they to endure this condition of the system, or must they give way to their passions, and incur the risk, nay the almost certainty of infection, or else have recourse to the odious vice by which the power of body and mind are alike prostrated?

Fortunately the resources of medicine step in and free them from this tantalizing situation. Although impure connexion is of itself an evil and a sin, yet is it of so much less iniquity than that monster crime of Onanism, that it appears almost like refined gold beside it. It is one which few young men would hesitate to acknowledge, while a natural shame urges them to keep all knowledge of the latter offence entirely to themselves, and to shun all allusion to it. Of these two evils, we would say choose the less—but there stands in the way the stumbling block of contagion or infection.

The dread of being infected with gonorrhea or clap, and syphilis then prevents many from the natural and moderate indulgence of the passions, and drives them to the commission of masturbation. This is a state of things very shocking to contemplate, and the evil is soi much the greater that from the great number of unmarried men in large towns, and the indiscriminate intercourse that takes place between them and the fair but frail Cyprians who perambulate our streets, the greatest precaution before the act, manifested in the selection of the female, etc., will not avail to protect the man against disease. In fact the female may impart disease, although she herself be at the time free from any symptoms of it, inasmuch as she may have had a previous visitor, labouring under infection, and her organs may have retained sufficient of the virus to infect her next friend. vow mutual love, fidelity and friendship. It was therefore most wisely ordained in the beginning of time, that "a man shall leave his father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife, and they shall be one flesh."





How then can a young man indulge his natural feelings and desires, without danger and without incurring the dreadful consequences of Onanism?

We have already said that happily the resources of medicine come to his relief:

PERRY'S PREVENTATIVE LOTION

will enable him to have connexion without any reason to dread the consequences in the shape of the venereal disease, in any of its forms, such as gonorrhea or clap, and syphilis. It should be used after each act of connexion—the penis being carefully washed with it, and the gland and prepuce, more especially about the corona, being cleansed most attentively and assiduously with it. Carefully and attentively employed according to these directions,

PERRY'S PREVENTATIVE LOTION

will effectually prevent all danger from indiscriminate sexual intercourse.

Price 33s. per Bottle, or in £5 Cases.

PREPARED ONLY BY

MESSRS. R. AND L. PERRY AND Co.,

19, BERNERS-STREET OXFORD-STREET,

LONDON.





Observe the signature impressed in a stamp on the outside of each wrapper, and the name and address of the proprietors blown in each bottle.

May be had of all Patent Medicine Vendors in town and country throughout the United Kingdom, the Continent of Europe and America.



ON MARRIAGE.



Having duly considered the diseases pertaining to the reproductive powers of both sexes, from early indulgence or infection, we now offer a few remarks on that sacred condition which the late " Invalid " when convalescent, will probably be most anxious to adopt.

Conjugal society is a perpetual compact between man and woman to live together in mutual love and friendship, for the procreation, conservation, and education of children, and to aid each other by mutual succour for the course of life. The difference of the sexes was instituted for this purpose; and there is an innate desire implanted in both to perpetuate their species, their names, and to transfer their property to their children.

Of all the social institutions, there is none which exercises so great an influence upon states as marriage. The prosperity of a nation depends upon the strength and vigour of its inhabitants, which are powerfully influenced by the comparative perfection to which the marriage laws are carried.

It was therefore wisely ordained that marriage should be a sacred compact, for which those engaged in it should forsake their nearest relations and friends. The parties contracting it form the strictest union and nearest relation that can be established between two individuals; their temporal concerns are identical, and their social and individual happiness dependent on each other, and consequently marriage is universally considered a source of the greatest comfort and most perfect enjoyment on earth, securing all the advantages of sincere friendship, and the reciprocal offices of true and tender affection. The parties entering into this state,





Marriage was originally instituted between the first of the human species, as a religious, political, civil, and moral contract of Divine ordinance—the origin of society, the law of the reproduction of the species,—a contract for the transmission of property,—a guarantee for obligations the most interesting to mankind. It is therefore universally to be respected.

Man is a rational and social being, deriving his chief earthly happiness from the delights of society, and the interchange of thought. It is the interchange of the charities and sympathies of life, which gives to human existence its real and only value. Hence, man in a state of solitude, or even of isolated luxury or affluence, would be the most pitiable and miserable of creatures.

Exposed to the corroding cares, sorrows, bitter disappointments, and misfortunes of life, man cannot brave alone, and unfriended, the ingratitude, envy, and malevolence of the world.

The perfection and sincerity of friendship can only be found in the marriage state, where an identity of interests shuts out all petty jealousies and vexations, and a unity of thought, sentiment, feeling, and conduct exists. The qualities essential to conjugal happiness are chiefly of a mental or moral nature, and not merely of a physical kind, as is unfortunately too generally the case.

The proper age for marriage, according to the law of this country, is twenty-one for a male and eighteen for a female; but many physiologists are of opinion that the ages of twenty-five and twenty-one would more accord with the complete development of adult powers. Buffon held this position, "the natural state of man after puberty is marriage;" but this is evidently untenable, because the human body is not fully developed at this period of life, the different functions are not perfect, and as the organs are only in the progress of their growth, the offspring would be infirm and delicate; and the sexes totally incompetent to perform their various important duties of parents. It is at, or rather after the adult age, that the mind and body have arrived at perfection; and therefore moralists and legislators have fixed this age as the best for marriage.





It is universally known, that premature or excessive exertion of any part of the body is succeeded by fatigue or decay of such part; and more especially before complete development has taken place. Hence it follows, that the premature exertion of the genital functions, or marriage at too early an age, must not only be highly injurious to the parents in most cases, but also to the constitution of the offspring. It is also a moral and medical precept, that both male and female should observe the strictest continence until the adult age, so that the great end of marriage, the propagation of healthy children may be accomplished.

Persons of strong and sound constitutions beget healthy infants, while those who undergo excessive mental or corporeal exertion have generally feeble offspring. It is for this reason that simple, stupid villagers generally beget children of high physical and moral powers; while men of the greatest genius, who overexert their mental faculties, often engender only idiots or pusillanimous infants. By protracted continence or purity of morals, the species are improved and strengthened both in mind and body.

It is manifest that the offspring of parents whose attachment to each other is but slight, or who are labouring under the infirmities of old age, or are enfeebled by the destructive habit of self-pollution, are themselves not only feeble and debilitated, but without any remarkable faculties. It is also well known that parents contaminated with ill-cured syphilis, often beget infants which are born dead and decomposed between the seventh and eighth month of pregnancy; and that the disease in question is a common cause of premature parturition. It does not, however, follow that every man infected with syphilis in its secondary or chronic form, begets infants that perish in the last months of pregnancy, for it requires a certain degree of contamination to cause this result; when the taint is slighter





infants are born alive, but weak and delicate, and either covered with a copper or dark-coloured eruption about the genitals and thighs at birth, or else it appears soon afterwards. We have fully described this disease in infants in another part of this treatise.

During the last few years we have known numerous instances where men having laboured under local debility, have been disappointed in begetting offspring, but who upon their recovering, have rendered the marriagebed fruitful. Impuissance in the male, then, may be considered, as far as our judgment carries us, the most frequent cause of fruitless marriages.

The want of offspring is a source of much domestic infelicity to married couples. We do not mean to imply that family jars are engendered in lieu thereof; but there is necessarily a want appreciated best by those who are fortunately blest with a family. How common is the expression with heirless people, "I would give anything to have a child."

If it is in the power of medicine to further that object, the Cordial Balm Of Syriacum can alone aiford assistance; it strengthens the secretory vessels and the reservoirs at the same time, and by that means removes radically all the affections of the genital parts in both sexes; substituting vigour for impotence, and fecundity in place of barrenness.

Marriage was instituted by the divine Creator in the time of man's primitive innocence, as the means of his happiness, and for the perpetuation of his race. The wisdom of its institution has been felt and acknowledged in every age; but before undertaking that important and prudent step, we would suggest the necessity of the patient first thoroughly convincing himself of his perfect recovery, and of obtaining the sanction of his medical attendant, ere he embark his happiness and that of a being who ought to be most dear to him, by a process which he cannot afterwards honourably annul, and which, unless he be thoroughly restored, will entail physical deformity and mental misery on the innocent and helpless.

Among the disqualifications of marriage are various diseases,—congenital, that is to say, those which are barn with us; accidental, and those which proceed from infection, all of which have been treated upon in their several places; but of all causes of the impairment of the virile powers, excess of indulgence is the most powerful. Marriage, as has been already stated, has, as one of its most important aims, the propagation of the species, and the consequent perpetuation of the human race. It is obvious that those persons who have rendered themselves impotent by excessive sexual indulgence, or by the practice of the solitary passion,—the worst of all vices—are, until they have been restored to a state of health and functional perfection by the resources of art, totally unfit to enter on the marriage state, as they are incapacitated for the performance of its special rite.





In order that this may be fully understood, it may be advisable to give some account of the physiology of generation,—a subject in itself most germain to the nature of this work.

We have often been asked to state our opinion respecting the frequency with which the repetition of sexual excitement may take place, without the production, immediate or remote, of any injury to the general constitution. As very few individuals govern themselves, particularly in early life, by rules of caution on this interesting point, unless physical necessity binds them to it, we shall merely state that the rites of Venus should be circumscribed within the limits of temperance, and that no unnecessary stimuli should be used to excite this natural function into action; for copulation with men, like menstruation with women, terminates in many diseases: much must depend on the natural powers of the constitution, and the peculiar frame of the individual's susceptibility to animal excitement, as well as the care displayed towards the individual during the period of his growth; and many subsidiary circumstances, both of a general, local, and mental character, with certain limitations, are to be considered; for with some, chastity has no virtue.

We are acquainted with no function of the animal mechanism so specially dependent upon the mind as this: for though sexual intercourse is a compound act of the body and the mind, its essential energy, its peculiar stimuli, proceed from the mind; and according to the exciting energy of the mind is the act performed. Thus, from a compound act of indescribable pleasure and languor, organic beings are endowed with power to produce others similar to themselves; or rather, an essential pari of themselves is separated in the act, the power of that separation being concentrated in the generative organs. The moment the semen has passed, from the greater exertion used by the male, languor and depression succeed; and at this period his office is complete, and a new and complicated arrangement takes place in the female: but what is the character of that arrangement which actually takes place within the female uterus, when, after experiencing the most delightful and exquisite of all sensual pleasure, being properly impregnated, and on the eve of giving form and existence to her offspring, we yet know not.





The expansive theory of impregnation presents to the consideration innumerable points resting their basis on conjectural knowledge; and as we advance amid conflicting opinions, the intricacy of investigation loses none of its difficulty, because the experiments necessary to elucidate the facts are too minute to define; and even the result of those elaborate experiments, instead of giving support and new energy to each other, are very frequently in opposite contact. Science makes but a painful effort, when she endeavours to direct the attention to the first principles of the research; for from what stamina proceeds the primary principle of animal matter? Is a germen formed in the ovarium of the female, merely requiring impregnation by the semen virile? Is the homunculus contained in that semen; the female ovarium affording only a nidus for its formation? or does it co-equally originate from male and female? and is the animal produced by a reciprocal action of the seminal fluids? The peculiar and very striking similarity of feature, frame, and constitution, to each individual parent, supports the probability of such a rational hypothesis; which acquires new strength by a reference to the vegetable kingdom, and, in the opinion of many, incontestibly shews that the offspring is a compound of each individual parent. In opposition to these apparent evident conclusions, we hare to remark, that the minutest dissection exhibits no vessels in the female organs adapted to the secretion of semen; therefore it justly becomes an object of considerable doubt whether the female-has the power of secreting semen It is true, when impregnation has taken place, the nutritive apparatus assumes a proper increase at the sole expense of the female, in order to serve for the nutrition of the embryo; and the blood, in its passage through the vessels of the placenta, undergoes changes analogous to those which it experiences in the full grown animal, in its passage through the lungs and liver, by its assuming in those vessels new vital properties.





In order to illustrate, as far as our investigation can go, the nature of this animal process, by which the sensitive creation is formed, and whose constant operation is known from experience, it will be necessary to inquire what is requisite for that purpose. The ovum must be in a state of maturity: there must be a great .determination of blood in the womb, sufficient, together with the venereal stimuli, to induce a certain action in the Fallopian tubes, by which the fimbriae grasp the ovum that is to be impregnated. During this condition of the parts concerned, the semen virile must be propelled into the uterus, in order that its vivifying particles shall pass along the tube to the ovarium. Fecundation having actually taken place, a motion is induced in the vivified ovum, which ruptures the tender vesicles that contain it: the action of the fimbrias of the Fallopian tube is then induced, which grasp and convey it into the tube; which, by its peculiar peristaltic motion, conducts it into the cavity of the uterus, there to vivify and maturate to a proper increase, at the expense of the mother. What is the precise mode which nature takes to vivify the germ, or what actually takes place at the moment of conception, investigation has left us where it found us: all we are certain of, is, that this vital power is usually diffused through all animate creation. From the knowledge we have of the correct operations of nature, we have no doubt, were we possessed of the means minutely to examine the ovarium at the period of fecundation and during the early day* «





of uterine gestation, a series of phenomena would be developed which we could render familiar to our reason; but having no such opportunity, we wander through the extensive labyrinth of the phenomena that accompany the vital functions of reproduction, without being able to acquire any positive fact that can lead to a result favourable to our limited investigation. It is universally admitted, and ancient and modern investigation supports the universality of that admission, that all parts of an animal body are formed ob origine, and exist, though that existence is in miniature, from the first formation of the foetus in utero; and that no one part of the animal frame owes its existence to another. Leuwenhoeck maintains that animalculae exist in the semen virile; but by what mode these are produced, he left the inquiring mind to search for. Others, again, have supposed that the semen virile is itself unorganised; that after remaining in the vesicular seminales a given period, it becomes there concocted; and, on its arrival in utero, takes an action, that germinates into existence, where nature provides for its support and expulsion. The continuity of the act is the only point we can ascertain, and from which these facts are deduced; viz. that a being, once created, never dies— that, in its progress through life, it is subject to a certain action, which changes its character without destroying its particles, and though, by chemical attraction and combination, it may enter into an infinity of bodies, yet it must carry with it some of its original germ, which was contained in the ovum when fecundated by the secretion of the male coming in contact with it, the vivifying principle of which is afterwards solely nourished by the female: for at the moment of fecundation, by a mutual process of action and re-action, a circulation takes place between the foetus in embryo and the nutritive power of the mother, by the placenta, and, as far as hypothesis goes, gives strong proofs of the preexistence of the germ in the female.

From this it evidently appears, that the semen is of the first importance to the animal, economy; that if it is repeatedly excited to emission by an unnatural stimulus, the parts become feeble; and if carried to a very great excess, it causes impotence, by rendering the semen so thin, as even to stain the linen of a yellow color. Such semen has not had due time to concoct, and is emitted without desire or ability: in some cases the secretion takes place so quickly, that the least friction on the glans has produced its emission, even the act of walking or riding fast. Yet here we would have it distinctly understood, that all organs are strengthened and improved by a proper and natural exercise of their functions; and at the end of a certain period, they perform with ease those actions which at first were difficult to them.





Respecting the act itself, it is ever to be considered of service to the full grown individual, and is justly ranked among the necessary evacuations; for, modified agreeably to the mechanism of the various and complicated circumvolutions of the vessels through which it has to pass, it obeys an analogous law to that which regulates the discharges, and, in a given proportion, its preternatural retention of emission exhibits similar symptoms of derangement; thus a too great and continued evacuation of this elaborate fluid, not only impairs its particular organs, but immediately or remotely affects the whole system, producing tremor, relaxation, dejection, &c.; whilst, by its long retention, it not only diminishes the actual energies of youthful passions in the attitude of their meridian vigour, but finally produces a reluctance to the sublime and more fascinating blandishments of sexual bliss, and with a cachectic habit of body and morosity of disposition; for by long retention of the semen, it not only loses its stimulating character, but even the spermatic vessels close for want of the active blood to distend and to stimulate them into action.

Nor is it a matter of astonishment, that where these habits, or venereal excitement, are frequent, some manifest effect should be produced on the constitution; the first more than the latter, because nature is more consulted by one action than the other: and as these organs first suffer, receiving their nervous ramification from the spinal marrow, it has been concluded (with some analogy to fact, we must confess) as the commencement of tabes dorsalis :—it may be the exciting, but never the predisposing cause. Nor are these effects less vivid and certain on the male than the female; for these unfortunate habits give to the female an irritability of constitution, and an ardency of mind, which, as the system advances to its final period of development, renders them susceptible to uterine disease and its varied symptoms: and where, from a peculiar delicacy of structure, a predisposition or a natural irritability of system exists, this habit not only produces a corresponding excitement in the uterine vessels, but brings with it a train of nervous derangement that annihilate the best efforts of medicine to con'rol, and thus give birth to those chronic and non-defined diseases yclept nervous.





We believe that tabes dorsalis has rarely been brought on by actual venery. The distinction between venery and self-pollution consists in the one having no actual excitement or proper object for emissiom: the individual loses all, and gains nothing; while by excessive coition with a lovely woman, a man is not sensible of his lassitude and feeling; conscious of directing his passions to' their proper focus, no remorse remains behind, to become the gnawing canker-worm of the heart. Surely, then, this holds forth to the unhappy a pleasing prospect of consolation when he departs from this unnatural practice—a practice he ought to leave no means untried to break from.

Another and equally great consolation to the afflicted, is, that when the diseases resulting from pollution and excess have been cured, the functions of generation are restored, and the previously unhappy victim of folly is placed in a condition to acquit himself properly of his duties as a husband, and ultimately as a parent.

Individuals may be injured in more ways than one; few constitutions are capable of bearing with the repetition of the act of coition, even when practised in a moderate manner, without feeling the loss nature has sustained by the effort; while by having too frequent intercourse, (and this is often the case with married persons of sanguine disposition) the seminal fluid, instead of being of its natural consistency, in consequence





of the continual drain, and the enormous demand on the genital organs, at last becomes thin, and watery, and without the least prolific power. The effects of this excessive drain on the most important secretion of the body, and of the great nervous excitement which accompanies it, are soon clearly made in the general condition of the economy. When such is the case, it is of the utmost importance to replenish the loss which has been sustained, and to restore, or as it were regenerate, the exhausted powers of the system: to further that object, the Cordial Balm Of Syriacum can alone afford assistance; it should be taken in the dose of one table spoonful and a half, three times a day, viz. morning, noon, and night, in order to enrich the semen, and favour the reproduction of that liquor, so as to ensure at once its due elaboration, and sufficient retention for the next demand. The virile powers would not become impaired even in old age, if this medicine were universally adopted.



CASES.

The following communications are made public, at the earnest desire of the parties who have been under our care, some of whom have intimated a wish to have their names attached, while others have objected from feelings of shame. To prevent any unpleasant feeling on so delicate a subject, we have substituted the general initials of A. B., C. D., &c.; nor do we desire at any future period to adopt any other plan, or to publish any case or communication, but such as we may be entitled to make public, at the request of the parties themselves to whom such cases refer.

L. O. B. aged 20, apparently stout, was about six years ago, while at school, initiated in baneful practices. It was not till after three years. continuance in these habits, that he felt the least inconvenience from them. Then, however, he was suddenly affected with frequent emissions while in bed; but as they proved troublesome only for the moment, he was not in the least intimidated by them, and for a year after, he continued his habit more frequently-^ han ever. About two years ago, these involuntary emissions became more frequent, occurring four and often iix times in the week. They were then followed by cold shiverings, which lasted for an hour or two each time, with complete inability to sleep during the remainder of the night. lie was also affected with frequent cold perspirations all over the body, coldness of the extremities, shrinking of the penis, and great pain at the stomach; sometimes with a voracious appetite tor food, but more frequently a disgust for food for several days. On such occasions, if he swallowed anything but liquids, the sensations he felt in the stomach were not only painful, but indescribably irksome. From the difficulty, too, which he felt in being obliged to perform the act of respiration, which was almost entirely effected by the voluntary powers, he believed he should die suddenly while in bed. About that time, he felt an irregular swelling in one testicle; and he began, for the first time, to suspect the cause of his complaint. In order that his relations might not become acquainted with it, he exerted his ingenuity to prevent them applying for medical assistance. He at first thought, that, by abstaining from his former practices, which he resolved to do, he should recover without being obliged to have recourse to any other expedient; but this would not do; in addition to his other distresses his bowels became obstinately costive, and he could procure no evacuation, without the assistance of cathartic medicines. These with the cold bath, and the internal use of bark and wine, and occasionally mineral waters, were the only medicines he used till he commenced taking the Cordial Balm Of Syiuacum.





In the October following, this gentleman enjoyed much better health than he had done for about three years before; his appetite was more regular, and the state of his bowels more natural; his sleep was undisturbed by frightful dreams, ana the emissions only occurred once a week, and were unattended by the sensations formerly so distressing to him. We desired him to continue the medicine a few weeks longer.

On the 2nd of June in the succeeding year, we were glad to be informed by our patient, that his health was perfectly good, that he was capable of exercising all his functions, and seldom had an emission.



Gentlemen, Plymouth, Aug. 2nd, 1841.

Through a destructive secret practice which I have given way to from a very early period, I have greatly impaired the powers of my body and mind. A dizziness comes over my eyes, a singing and sometimes a dull noise in my ears; with dejection of spirits. I am very nervous, and upon the leasi irritation, such a trembling comes over me that I can scarcely stand; and I have frequently a sensation as if cold water were running rom the crown of my head down my back. I have now scarcely any desire for venereal pleasures; and very seldom an erection. "When I mw»kwi*i. - '^ajg T am fieiied with such a trembling that my legs wiUL hardly support me; my teeth chatter, my mouth becomes parched and dry, a thin, clear, and slimy liquid runs from the penis, which seems likewise so chilly and flabby, that at times I cannot produce an erection sufficiently strong to perform the act. Upon taking any familiarities with a female, though it may produce a faint desire or sensation, I have no erection, but a little titillation, and the same thin clear water comes from me, without leaving any stain upon my linen.





My stools leave at times a slimy substance after them. My mind is so overpowered with the thoughts of this complication of symptoms, that scarcely anything affords me pleasure ; the least exercise fatigues; and 1 frequently sit thinking of my misfortunes, till the idea of having brought them upon myself almost distracts me.

I am induced to apply to you for advice, having read a case similar to my own in your invaluable work entitled the " Silent Friend."

In consequence of having practised the detestable vice of Onanism, my constitution is so reduced, and the parts are rendered so imbecile by continued repetitions of that solitary gratification, that frequently in the act of coition the penis suddenly drops, nor will erection, although ever so slight, take place for hours afterwards. I am twenty-five years of age; and have pursued this vicious habit for many years.

Inclosed is your usual consultation Fee. Your early attention to my unfortunate situation will much oblige, Yours, respectfully W.H*

The following extract from this gentleman.s ninth letter will show the wonderful efficacy of the Cordial Balm of Syriacum, another course of which the party determined to enter upon.

"After this favourable report, if you think necessary, pray send but I am satisfied of my recovery, &c."

Nov. 20th., 1841. W.H.



Glasgow. Dear Sirs,—I do not find in your Silent Friend any case similar to my own; I shall, therefore without reserve state my case, and if you are of opinion that the Cordial Balm of Syriacum will cure me, I will commence a course willingly. I have had one or two attacks of gonorrhea, and since I had the last, about three years ago, I have been suffering somewhat under that state described as morbid irritability, and an inability to retain the fluid in the secreting organs. Before the period stated, my powers were quite equal I believe to those of the generality of men. My age is forty three, and I am in excellent general health and spirits. Since the period above stated, I do not think the penis has ever had the capacity it formerly had, when in bed. I constantly have erections, but seldom if ever seminal emissions. On these occasions, the erections go down, without any emissions; but when I address a female, with an intent to cohabitation, the penis immediately becomes half erected, and fluid oozes out, without any sensation whatever. This, however, does not quench the desire. When I come to the point with a female, I feel all the desire I ever did, but the watery oozing continues, and the penis does not expand to anything near the size it does when I am by myself in bed. When I commence the act of cohabitation, I frequently emit before 1 penetrate, and invariably the instant after penetration. I presume it must be a weakness in the vessels containing the fluid. I have now waived all delicacy, and fully explained to you my case, and I hope you will excuse the freedom with which I have done so. I should say my case came under the head of nervous debility, but that I am in excellent health and spirits. If gentlemen, you think, on this full statement, that you see my case clearly and can cure it, I shall be happy to place myself under your care as soon as possible. You will of course be pleased to consider this





as strictly private.

I am, dear Sirs, yours truly, K.R.C.

Extract. "With great pleasure I announce my complete recovery. I have now arrived at as good a state of health and strength as ever; the medicine has been long finished, and my delay in writing was, that I wished to see if there would be any return of the disorder. K.R.C.



A young gentleman of the age of sixteen had contracted a certain habit, which he continued until he was twenty-five. At this period he experienced extreme weakness of the optic nerves, and a very great dimness of sight: his memory was much impaired; he had also violent head aches, and sometimes excruciating pains in his forehead and temples. On endeavouring to read he frequently found himself seized with a species of giddiness, similar to that resulting from a state of inebriation; the pupils of the eyes also were extremely dilated, and pained him most acutely. He often shed tears involuntarily, and a quantity of corrosive pus continually oozed from the corners of his eyes. One of the worst and most debilitating symptoms, was an infirmity to which he was subject, almost every night in his sleep, which reduced him to a most deplorable state of debility and emaciation.

This was an extremely obstinate and protracted case, but in the course of a few months he was restored to himself, if we may use the expression, and to society, of which he is now a respectable and useful member.



TO MESSRS. PERRY & Co., Surgeons.

Dear Sirs,—I return you my sincere thanks and most grateful acknowledgments, for the wonderful cure I have experienced, and am extremely





desirous of annexing my remarkable case to your list of cures for the good of society. I am forty years of age, and about 18 months ago was afflicted in the following distressing manner:—a disordered stomach, dry consumptive cough, weakness in the voice, hoarseness, shortness of breath on the least exercise, and relaxation of the whole system, paleness, languor of the eyes, weakness of sight and memory, proceeding, no doubt, from the baneful and solitary vice which is early acquired at school. I applied to several of the faculty, but received no benefit, and was in consequence prevented from entering into the marriage state. I was at last recommended by a friend of mine who had derived great benefit from taking your Medicine for a similar complaint, to write to your Medical Establishment for some. You will bear in recollection, that 1 received of you three distinct packages, and before I had finished the last, 1 found myself completely recovered. I have now entered into the matrimonial state, and have a son to crown my happiness. Castle Gate, Norwich. Yours, with great esteem and regard, T.F.



MESSRS. PERRY, Surgeons.

Worcester, July 6,1838. Dear Sirs,—A few months ago I called at your establishment for your advice, when you recommended a course of the Balm of Syriacum. I am at last, with much shame, induced to address you on the miserable situation I was in, when I commenced taking your blessed Medicine. I am convinced the disease I was afflicted with, was solely occasioned by my having contracted, in my early youth, a most infamous habit, the continual practice of which had totally destroyed my constitution. The health of my body was not only affected, but the powers of my mind were much weakened; my judgment had lost its solidity, and my memory its retentive faculties: my head was confused, and subject to frequent swimmings, and I was much troubled with an oppression at my chest which occasioned a constant perspiration. I had pains in my stomach and weakness and a general debility with constant yawning, and drowsiness; my appetite was fluctuating, my spirits greatly depressed, so that at times I could scarcely refrain from sighing and involuntary weeping; my eyes were inflamed and frequently emitted a watery humour; in a word I was an object of misery. I paid strict attention to your advice, and continued taking the Medicine according to your directions for about three months. I am now perfectly recovered; therefore I think it not only my duty to acknowledge the service you have done me, but to inform the Public for the benefit of others, who labour under the same, Qx any disease similar to those from which I am so happily recovered.

I am, dear Sirs, your most obliged humble servant, J. C. JN





CASE OF MR. G. M.

Having in my youth, I confess it with shame, committed the heinous offence of Self-Pollution, I brought upon myself a running, which neither the cold bath nor any thing that I was advised to apply, could remove. Thus circumstanced, no one suspected me of labouring under any bodily complaint but my Doctor, which I account for from my being naturally robust, and always preserving my colour. At this crisis I was induced to pay my addresses to a young lady of great personal accomplishments, and soon obtaining her consent, was united to her in the bands of wedlock. This I must acknowledge was highly imprudent in me, who knew from my debilitated state, that I was utterly incapable of consummating my nuptials. A seminal discharge always preceded a perfect erection, which at first I was weak enough to attribute to a strong desire of possession, but the same disappointment continuing, I had recourse to drinking, which instead of remedying the evil, only increased it; no kind of erection could I procure, and I positively emitted the seed always before connection took place. The distress caused by my being in this unfortunate predicament was greatly heightened by the fear that my wife had dropped some hints to her mother of my incapacity for matrimonial duty, and I looked on a divorce as inevitable, when I was advised by a friend, whom I acquainted with my truly critical situation, to purchase some bottles of your Cordial Balm of Syriacum. Perseverance in taking this excellent medicine has given stamina to my constitution, of which 1 thought my youthful excesses had entirely bereft it; in about five months it accomplished a cure, and it is with pleasure, I now inform you, that my wife is pregnant with her first child, of which I think 1 should never have been the father, had it not been for your precious medicine.



To MESSRS. PERRY & Co, Sugeons.

Dear Sirs, Coventry.



On the 20th of last month, I received from you the last box of medicine, and have since punctually followed the directions it contained. I write now to inform you that the medicine is nearly expended, and that for the last month there has not been any appearance of venereal affection. The only thing which now gives me uneasiness, is the continual weakness of the seminal organs,,which appears to have increased. I must beg your consideration to my case, and have to inform you that I shall be obliged to go abroad in the beginning of next week; therefore pray have the goodness to send me medicine for as long a time as you can, and copious directions for my guidance, both during the time it lasts, and afterwards. I shall most probably be stationary, and at liberty to follow any plan of living. Pray let me know under what circumstances 1 must increase or





diminish the dose of the Cordial Balm of Syriacum, and what diet and plan of life I must follow. However, I leave all this to you, not doubting that you will kindly feel for my situation, and wish to bring the work you have taken in hand, and so ably carried on, to a happy conclusion.

With many thanks for the kindness and attention you have shown me, I am dear sirs, yours, sincerely and obliged, K..L.

[The above gentleman.s case was one of the most complicated that ever came under our knowledge; the virile power had been nearly destroyed by the effects of Onanism—his habit was scorbutic, and he laboured under an irritable gleet. He has since acquainted us by letter of his complete recovery.]

To MESSRS. PERRY & Co. Surgeons.

Gentlemen, Kilkenn y.



I was sent to school not far from London, where I was very early initiated in the baneful practice of Self-pollution, which with shame I confess I have followed with very little interruption till a short time since, when I, fortunately for myself, saw your invaluable little Treatise. It was then for the first time, {though I had before often suspected that I was not doing right,) I became fully sensible of the madness of my conduct, and the certain misery I was entailing upon myself; and though I have now determined never to recommence the practice, and do not think my case so bad as very many of those you have cured, yet I do want some of your assistance, and shall give you a short statement of my case. My age is nearly twenty—I am thin and not tall—my habits are sedentary, my manner of living regular, and my diet plain—I rise generally between six and seven, breakfast at eight, dine at four, and have my tea at eightsupper I hardly ever eat. I am not, thank God, now so much troubled with nocturnal emissions, but the semen which I used to void in my wretched practice; was always thin and watery, and I found at last after one acta, I had great difficulty in obtaining another. In the few connections 1 have had with women, I have always had emissions before I wished it, and afterwards found myself unable to obtain a sufficient erection, all desire being gone. On the whole I am afraid that I have materially injured myself, and now I trust entirely to you for a cure.

I had forgotten to state, that for the last four or five days, I have been, and am now still, troubled with pain in the right testicle, which I think is rather swollen ; I am also troubled with a pain in my thigh, and under part of the groin. These, I believe, are all the parts of my case. I enclose you a note, and shall be glad to receive a letter of advice, and also some medicine from you as soon as possible, and at the same time I will thank you to let me know whether I shall be obliged to take any large quantities, and what the probable expense will be.

I am, gentlemen, your very obedient servant, Mc. C.

*** Cured by a course of Messrs. Perry.s Medicines.





CASE OP MR. D. M., OF CHESTER.

I was subject to a venereal disorder nineteen years, and during that period was under the hands of the first men in the science of physic, who adopted every method wherein the smallest probability of successcould be found, and apparently the disease was entirely expelled; t>ut the alleviation was but for a moment, and the disease then returned with double force. The natural consequence resulting from the inefficacy of the various methods adopted, and the violent operation of astringent minerals produced an ulcer on the lungs. Then the horrors of existence were experienced, a description of which would be an attempt vague and inconsistent; those only who have felt that degree of misery can be sensible of its effects.

During this period, my dissolution was the only object of my prayers; when I received from a friend a pamphlet of Messrs. Perry's recommending their medicines, in which was pointed out several cases of a nature similar to my own; through the importunity of my friend, and being conscious I could not be in a worse situation, I sent to Messrs. Perry, and went under a regular course of their medicine, and in four months, was astonishingly recovered.

[Mr. D. M. is entirely restored since the above statement, and has recommended the Medicines with that zeal which he is sensible they merit. ]



To MESSRS. PERRY & CO. Gentlemen,—With heartfelt gratitude, I return you sincere thanks for *he wonderful benefit I have experienced from your salutary advice and highly valuable medicines. About three months since, having unfortunately contracted the venereal disease, and not regarding it at the time as anything material; I at length, suddenly found myself plunged into .the deepest misery; for I at last discovered that my body was impregnated with that distressing disorder: such as nodes on my shin bones, ulcerated throat, diseased nose, with pains in my head, and at last a general debility and decay of the constitution ensued, and had I not persevered in the use of your Medicines, death would have put an end to my miserable existence long ere this. Happily for me, receiving one of your publications, I applied at the Establishment, and you prescribed a course of your Medicine (which to speak plainly, I put very little faith in, having tried so many patent medicines in vain.) After taking one bottle at 33s. I perceived little or no benefit; however I did not despair, but continued to proceed according to the directions, when to the great surprise of my friends, and my own astonishment, in the course of a short time, discovered wonderful improvement, and an entire alteration in my whole person. Nothing could exceed my joy, as my prospects in life are great. I continued the Medicine for two months, and was restored to health





and strength, which I had long been a stranger to; those unhappy persons who may be labouring under this destructive disease, should take time to consider the dreadful consequences arising therefrom, and make immediate application for your superior advice, and much esteemed medicines. I remain, dear Sirs,

Norwich, Your ever grateful and obliged, B. P.



Dear Sirs, Taunton, July, 1847.

I have much pleasure in stating that I have frequently used your Preventative Lotion during the last few years, and have always found it effectual in the prevention of disease. It is easy of use, and free from objection—I have not found it, on any occasion, to produce unpleasant or injurious consequences.

Messrs. PERRY & Co. I am, dear Sirs, yours obediently,

19, Berners-st J.R.



Gentlemen, Edinburgh, April, 1847.

Several of my acquaintances who have tried your Preventative Lotion, .and assured me that it was completely effectual, and fully competent to prevent all risk of infection. On this however I placed but little reliance, having previously employed all the means recommended by friends with out any beneficial result. I was, however, induced upon one occasion to give it a trial, and had reason to be so well satisfied with the result, that I would not now be without a bottle of it on any account. I have several times unfortunately caught a severe gonorrhea, which from a peculiarity in my constitution, always produced the most frightful symptoms which result from that disease. Since I have used your Lotion I have entirely escaped my foe, nor shall I in future entertain any dread of it. With many thanks, gentlemen, for this great benefit, Messrs. PERRY & Co. I am, yours obliged,

19, Berners-st. 11. M. 6.



Gentlemen, Bridgewater, May 19th, 1847.

Your Preventative Lotion is truly what its name purports it to be. Having suffered previously on several occasions, from venereal infection, I was readily induced, on the recommendation of a friend, to try it, and I have hitherto found it most serviceable. Being of a rather free disposition, I am easily led into error, for which I used to pay very dearly, having, as I have already said, suffered from many of the diseases so ably described in your Silent Friend. Thanks to your Lotion, however, I hope never to be placed in such a situation again.

Messrs. PERRY & Co. I am, Gentlemen,

19, Berners-st. Your obedient obliged servant,

R. B.

R





Many persons who have imagined themselves cured of the venereal disease, have had the misfortune to find the disease break out again six or seven years afterwards. A proof of this happened in our practice the other day. A gentleman was afflicted with the complaint, and was cured as he thought by the advice and prescription of an eminent surgeon. He afterwards entered on the state of matrimony, four months after which, he caught a violent cold, which terminated in a sore throat. At this crisis we were applied to, and informed him that it proceeded from an old venereal complaint. He then called in an apothecary, who treated his complaint as a common sore throat, until he became so bad, that he was compelled to call in a medical man, who confirmed the truth of what we had told him, but too late for his recovery, so that he fell a sacrifice to his obstinacy. Persons, therefore, should be extremely cautious in causing the eradication of this complaint, for which nothing is better than Messes. Perry's Celebrated Medicines, which have justly obtained credit as a remedy in this disease, and are now generally employed, particularly in the after consequences. Whatever stage of the complaint the patients may be in, or whatever the mode of curing may consist of, the Cordial Balm Of Syriacum is evidently one of the most efficacious and valuable additions to venereal remedies that can possibly be adopted. It contains the most valuable properties as a medicine in these diseases we could wish for; an alterative, antivenereal, and stimulating diaphoretic, it conveys its active principles throughout the body, penetrating even the minutest vessels, removing all corruptions, contaminations and impurities from the vital stream, searching out the morbid virus, and radically expelling it through the skin.





NOTICE TO PATIENTS.



For a long series of years past a great portion of our practice has been carried on in Epistolary CorresPondence. Since, however, the alteration in the postage regulations, the number of the correspondents have increased many fold. It will be apparent with what facility advice can be sought for, and obtained within a few hours, thus advantaging alike persons abroad and at home. By the present postage arrangements, distance is no hindrance or additional expense to invalids resident in the Highlands, the limits of the Welsh mountains, the Eastern Coast, or at the Land's End; and by them also some of the severest infirmities of mental and physical life can be revealed and assuaged. We have alluded to the diffidence besetting individuals suffering under many of the calamities enumerated, the diffidence that induces them to bear the ills they have, rather than, with a view to their relief or mitigation, take into their confidence a professional neighbour, or even a relative or friend; and we have adduced the foregoing cases to shew with what promptness and quietude the difficulties may be overcome, and what probable success may follow. Letters may be signed A. B., or by any other initials, and will meet with prompt attention, as in all professional engagements, the most inviolable secresy may be relied on.





We are fully assured that much good has been effected by persons possessed of philanthropic feelings, who have become purchasers of this work, in order to distribute it casually among those parties who are acquainted with a large circle of friends; who, in like manner after perusing the same, have forwarded it anonymously or otherwise, to other individuals within the range of their acquaintance; so that extended publicity is the result which has been, and daily is the means of rescuing hundreds of unhappy victims of weakness and indiscretion, from the must bitter anguish, and certain premature dissolution.

All communications and orders are requested to be forwarded to tae LONDON ESTABLISHMENT.



MESSRS. PERRY & Co.

MAT BE PERSONALLY CONSULTED AT TBEI1 ESTABLISHMENT,

19- BERNERS STREET OXFORD STREET LONDON,

PUNCTUALLY FROM ELEVEN TILL TWO AND FIVB

TILL EIGHT, DAILY,



AND ON SUNDAYS FROM ELEVEN TILL ONE;

IT 18 NECESSARY TO OBSERVE THAT

ONLY ONE PERSONAL VISIT IS REQUIRED

FROM A COUNTRY PATIENT.





MESSRS. R. & L. PERRY & COS MEDICINES

MAT BE HAD OF THEIR FOLLOWING AGENTS, ALL OF WHOM ARE PATENT MEDICINE VENDERS, AND OF WHOM HAT BE HAD THE SILENT FRIEND.



LONDON AGENTS.

Barclay and Sons, Farringdon-street

W. Sutton and Co., 10, Bow Church-yard

W. Edwards, 67, St. Paul's Church-yard

S. Sanger, 150, Oxford-street

Hannay and Dietrichsen, 63, Oxford-street

Butler and Harding, 4, Cheapside

R. Johnson, 68, Cornhill

W. Strange, 21, Paternoster Row

Simpkin, Marshall and Co., Stationers Hall Court, Ave

Maria Lane. Kent and Richards, Paternoster Row.



COUNTRY AGENTS.

Aberdeen..—G. Reid and Son, Druggists, Union-street

Alloa.—Irvine, Druggist

Arbroath.—W. Baird, Guide Office

Armagh.—Thompson, Guardian Office

Athlone.—Gilchrist, Apothecary

Andover.—J. Dyson, Chemist, High-street

Ashford.—J. Farmer, Chemist

Aylesbury.—E. D. Lines, Chemist



Ballina.—W. Richey, Tyrawley Herald Office

Ballyshannon.—Carter, Herald Office

Banbury.—J. B. Austin, Chemist

Barnstaple.—W. Avery, Journal Office

Bangor, N. Wales.—J. Brown, Chronicle Office

Basingstoke.—R. S. Hulbert, Chemist, Church-street

Battle.—B. B. Stedman, Chemist

Bath.—Meyler and Son, Herald Office





J. and J. Keene, Journal Office

Barnsley.—Richard Pybus, Bookseller, Market Place Belfast.—W. Marshall and Co., High-street

C. Mc. Allister, Apothecary, High-street

Bedford.—C. Corrie, Chemist

Backing.—E. Pearse, Chemist

Berwick-on- Tweed.—J. Davidson, Chemist

Beverley.—W. B. Johnson, Bookseller, Market Place

Blackburn.—James Grime, Chemist

Blandford.—S. Groves, Chemist

Bolton.—Bradbury and Son, Booksellers

James Scowcroft, Chemist

Bodmin.—I. S. D. Pearce, Chemist, Fore-street

Boston.—J. Noble, Bookseller, Market-place

Bradford.—J. Pratt, Chemist, Ivegate



F. Remmington, Chemist, Ivegate

Braintree.—Thomas Jull, Chemist

Brecon, S. Wales.—E. Ward, Chemist

Bristol.—Ferris and Score, Druggists, Union-street

Dowling, Chemist, High-street

Birmingham.—H. Winnall, Bookseller

J. Guest, Bookseller

Bideford.—W. Cole, Bookseller, Allhalland-street

Brighton.—Richard Noakes, Chemist

Bridgend.—Philip Price, Post Office

Bridlington.—John Turby, Bookseller



Rayner and Cooper, Chemists

Bromley.—J. B. Shillcock, Chemist

Burton.—W. Wesley, Bookseller, High-street

Burg St. Edmunds.—G. Thompson, Bookseller

Bury, Lancashire.—W. Warhurst, Chemist



Cambridge.—W. H. Smith, Chemist, Crescent

W. S. Hobbs, Chemist, Bridge-street

Canterbury.—Cottrell and Paine, Chemists, St. Mar-

garet-street

Carlisle.—J. F. Whitridge, Bookseller

Cardiff.—H. Webber, Guardian Office

Cardigan.—W. Williams, Chemist, High-street





Carmarthen.—J. W. White, Chemist, Guildhall Square

Carnarvon.—Robert Griffith, Chemist, High-street

Chatham.—Forster, Chemist, High-street

Chelmsford.—Meggy and Chalk, Essex Herald Office

Cheltenham.—D. Gibbon, Chemist, 109, High-street

Chipping Norton.—I. H. Stephan, Chemist

Chipping Sodbury.—W. Pearce, Chemist



J. Miller, Chemist

Cirencester.—R. & W. Smith, Chemists

Coggeshall.—W. L. Oliver, Chemist

Colchester.—T. Smith, Chemist, High-street

Conway, N. Wales.—T. A. Roberts, Chemist

Cork.—Bolster and Co., Booksellers, St. Patrick-street

Clonmel.—Alderman Hacket, Bookseller, Main-street

Corsham.—John Stantial, Chemist

Coventry.—H. Merridew, Herald Office



C. A. Rollason, Bookseller, High-street.

Crewherne.—J. & W. Pearce, Chemists, Sheep-market

Cupar.—J. Smith, Bookseller and Druggist



Deal.—E. Moore, Chemist, Beach-street

Denheigh.—W. Edwards, Chemist

Derby.—T. Burroughs, Mercury Office

Devizes.—N. B. Randle, Bookseller, Market-place



R. Hayward, Chemist, St. John-street

Devonport.—Byers and Son, Independent Office

D. May, Printer, Winterbury-street

Doncaster.—Brook and Co., Gazette Office

Dorchester.—G. Simmonds, County Chronicle Office

Dorking.—Ede and Co., Chemists

Douglas, Isle of Man.—R. G. Kelley, Chemist, West-

street

Dover.—Forster, Chemist, Adrian-street

Drogheda.—Kelly, Bookseller, West-street

Dublin.—J. H. Powell, Bookseller, 10, Westmoreland-

street

Dundee.—James Drummond, Chemist, Overgate

Dunmow.—W. Piper, Chemist

Durham.— Brown and Co., Chemists J. H. Veitch, Chronicle Office



Edinburgh.—J. & R. Raimes and Co., Druggists, Leith

Walk





Edinburgh.— R. Lindsay, Chemist, 11, Elm Row

Egham.—J. W. Tanner, Chemist

Elgin.—D. Mc Bean, Chemist i

Exeter.—James Fitze, Bookseller

Enniskillen. —H. Beavan, Chronicle Office

Ealkirk.—Mr. Murdock, Druggist

Folkstone.—Richard Hammon, Chemist

Frome.—W. C. Brand, Chemist, Market-place



Glasgow.—D. Campbell, Bookseller and Druggist, 136,

Argyll-street ,



Gloucester.—Cliffe and Co., Chronicle Office

Goole.—D. Cass, Chemist, Dire-street

Gravesend.—Mr. Reid, Chemist



Independent Office

Greenwich.—T. Riches, Chemist, London-street

Halifax.—Leyland and Son, Booksellers, Corn Market

Halstead.—R. Skitter, Chemist



Hanley.—T. Allbut and Son, Booksellers, Market-place

Harrowgate.—Richardson and Son, Chemists

Hastings.—H. C. Led, Chemist, High-street

Haverford, East.—O. E. Davies, Chemist



Joseph Potter, Herald Office

Haverhill.—Charles Kitching, Chemist

Hereford.—Draper, Chemist, Broad-street

Holyhead.—H. G. Hughes, Chemist

Honiton.—T. E. Creak, Chemist

Horsham.—B. Neeves, Chemist, West-street

Hull.—M. Noble, Bookseller, Market-place

—i W. Bettison, Advertiser Office



Ilminster.—G. L. Williams, Chemist, Silver-street

Ipswich.—W. Silverston, Chemist, St. Nicholas-street

Inverness.—L. Mackintosh, 8, Church-street



Jersey.—Chadwick Le Lievre, Constitutional Office

Keighley.—T. D. Hundson, Chemist, High-street

Kendal.—W. Tindall, Strickland-gate

Kidderminster.—Pennell and Mark, Booksellers, High-

street





Kingston.—W. B. Jones, Chemist

Kingstown.—H. O'Connor, 77, George-street

Killenaule.—D. O'Reilly, Apothecary

Knaresborough.—John Acombe, Chemist, Market-place

—i M. Seeting, Chemist, High-street



Lancaster.—A. Milner, Guardian Office

Ledbury.—James Gibbs, jun., Printer and Stationer

Leeds.—J. Heaton, Bookseller, 7, Briggate

Leicester.—Thomas Woodward, Chemist, Hay Market

Leominster.—James Chillcott, Bookseller, Broad-street

Lewes.—H. Saxby, Chemist, High-street

Limerick.—Byfield and Co., Apothecaries, 132, George-

street

Lincoln.—J. Drury, Bookseller, High-street

Liverpool.—J. Priestly, Chemist, 25, Lord-street



W. Rawle, Chemist, 17, Church-street

T. Newton, Bookseller, Church-street Londonderry.—J. H. Rowe, Apothecary, Ferryquay-st. Loughborough.—J. Adams, Chemist, Market-place Lyme Regis.—Edward Thornton, Chemist, Broad-street Lynn.—Thew and Son, Advertiser Office

Macclesfield.—W. Ryder, Bookseller and Druggist, Mill-street

Maidstone.—Mares, Agles, and Co., Druggists, Bankstreet

Malton.—J. Wrangham, Chemist, Wheelgate

R. Jefferson, Chemist, Market-place

Manchester.—R. H. Ingham, Chemist, Market-place

Margate.—J. Gaskell, Chemist

Marlborough.—Emberlin and Harrold, Chemists, Highstreet

Merihyr Tydvil.—Thomas Stephens, Chemist, High-st.

Walter Thomas, Chemist, Opposite

the Angel

Midhurst.—G. Wolferstan, Chemist

Monmouth.—T. Farror, Beacon Office

Montrose.—Andrew Kerr, Perfumer

Newark.—James Bridges, Bookseller

Newbury.—John Sainsbury, Chemist, Market-place





New Cross.—L. Hill, Chemist

Newcastle-on-Tyne.—J. Blackwell and Co., Courant

Office

Newport.—Phillips, Chemist, High-street



E. V. Jenkins, Chemist, Commercial-street

Newport, Isle of Wight.—H. Cory, Chemist

Newry, Ireland.—S. Baillie, Apothecary

Newtown.—John Moore, Chemist, Broad-street

Northallerton.—C. Langdale, Chemist

Northampton.—G. Barry, Chemist

Norwich.—Stevenson and Matchett, Norfolk Chronicle

Office

Nottingham.—R. Sutton, Review Office



Oxford.—H. Slatter, Chemist, High-street

Orkney.—G. Garreach, Stromnep



Pembroke.—R. C. Treweeks, Chemist

Penzance.—I. Proctor, Chemist

Perth.—James Gowans, Apothecary

Peterborough.—Clark, Stationer

Petworth.—J. G. Walker, Chemist

Plymouth.—Nettleton and Co., Herald Office

Portsmouth.—Padwick, Chemist, High-street

Portsea.—Thomas Baltman, Druggist, 3, Camden Alley

Preston.—J. Walker, Bookseller

Poole.—J. T. Allen, Chemist, 106, High-street

Ramsgate.—J. R. Cousins, Chemist, 57, High-street

Reading.—S. Poulton, Chemist

Rochester.—R. Jefferys, Chemist

Rochford.—A. Harrington, Chemist

Romford.—J. Thurlby, Chemist, High-street

Ringwood.—W. Wheaton, Bookseller

Ryde, Isle of Wight.—A. Ellis, Chemist

Rye.—Charles West, Chemist

Roscommon.—Charles Tully, Journal Office

Saffron Walden.—J. Miller, Chemist

Salisbury.—Brodie aud Co., Journal Office



R. Farrant, Chemist, Market-place

Sandwich.—John Knowles, Chemist, Harnet-street





Sheerness.—J. Fife, Chemist

Sheffield.—A Whitaker, Bookseller, 22 and 27, Fargate

Shaftesbury.—G. M. and D. Roberts, jun., Booksellers,

High-street Shepton Mallett.—B. Ellis, Chemist, High-street Sherborne.—Longman and Co., Chemists, Cheap-street Shrewsbury.—John Watton, Chronicle Office Sidmouth.—John Harvey, Bookseller, Fore-street Sittingbourne.—P. W. Gordelier, Chemist Sligo.—Champion Office Southampton.—F. Vinen, Chemist, High-street South Moulton.—A. Tepper, Bookseller Stafford.—R. and W. Wright, Druggists St. Day.—J. Corfield, Chemist St. Austell.—W. H. Hern, Chemist Stamford.—S. Sharp, Chemist

Robert Bagley, Bookseller, Ironmonger-st.

Steyning.—H. Wolferstan, Chemist, High-street

St. Neots, Cornwall.—Sharp and Co, Chemists.

Stonehouse.—E. W. Cole, Bookseller, Edgcumbe-street

Stoney Stratford.—James Howe, Chemist

Stockport.—Fowler, Chemist, Bridge-street

Stokesley.—R. Calvert, Chemist, Market-place

Stirling.—M. Kirkwood, Druggist

Stroud.—T. Tombs, Chemist, King-street

Sunderland.—Vint and Carr, Herald Office

Swansea.—Thomas Evans, Chemist, High-street

Strood.—C. Martin, Chemist



Taunton.—Hitchcock and Son, Chemists, North-street

Trowbridge.—Henry Dyer, Chemist, Corner of Church



Yard Truro.—H. D. Martin, Chemist Tunbridge Wells.—James Allday, Chemist, Mount

Ephraim

Ulverstone.—John Jackson

Wakefield.—F. Cardwell, Chemist, Bread-street Warminster.—W. H. Taylor, Bookseller, Market-place Warwick.—M. Heathcote, Bookseller, Market-place Waterford.—Killilea, Chronicle Office





Westbury.—S. Taylor, Chemist, Market-place

Whitehaven.—R. Gibson, Chemist

Windsor.—S. Smith, Chemist

Wincanton.—Thomas Phillips, Chemist, Market-place

Winchester.—Jacob and Johnson, Chronicle Office

Wolverhampton.—Mander, Weaver, and Co,, Druggists

■ W. Parke, Bookseller, High-street

Woolwich.—Thomas Parkes, Chemist

Worcester.—Deighton, Journal Office

Worksop.—S. Sisson, Bookseller

Wrexham,—John Beale, Chemist, High-street



Yeovil.—G. Harvey, Chemist, Borough

York.—Bolton, Blanshard, and Co., Druggists, Mickle

gate Yoxford.—B. F. Martin, Chemist



* Watton 8c Co. Printer, 80, Bill-itreet.





s





About this Book - From Google

This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project to make the world's books discoverable online. It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume may appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the publisher to a library and finally to you.

Google Book Search has digitized millions of physical books and made them available online at the Google Books web site. The digitization at the most basic level is based on page images of the physical books. To make this book available as an ePub formated file we have taken those page images and extracted the text using Optical Character Recognition (or OCR for short) technology. The extraction of text from page images is a difficult engineering task. Smudges on the physical books' pages, fancy fonts, old fonts, torn pages, etc. can all lead to errors in the extracted text. Imperfect OCR is only the first challenge in the ultimate goal of moving from collections of page images to extracted-text based books. Our computer algorithms also have to automatically determine the structure of the book (what are the headers and footers, where images are placed, whether text is verse or prose, and so forth). Getting this right allows us to render the book in a way that follows the format of the original book.

Despite our best efforts you may see spelling mistakes, garbage characters, extraneous images, or missing pages in this book. Based on our estimates, these errors should not prevent you from enjoying the content of the book. The technical challenges of automatically constructing a perfect book are daunting, but we continue to make enhancements to our OCR and book structure extraction technologies.

We hope you'll enjoy these books as much as we do.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.

We also ask that you:

Make non-commercial use of the files: We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for personal, non-commercial purposes.

Refrain from automated querying: Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

Maintain attribution: The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

Keep it legal: Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe.



About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences.





