"A prudent man foresteth the evil,
and fleeth ; but the simpid pa^s or and
are punished ."



*

'it



Digitized 1


by the Internet Archive






i


n 2015







https://archive.org/details/b20407385



I




THE SCIENCE OF LIFE ;

OK

SELF-PRESERYATION.

A MEDICAL TREATISE

■''N NERVOUS AND PUYSICAL DEBILITY, BPERMA
TORRHCEA, IltPOTENCE, AND STERILITY,

wiTn

PRACTICAL OBSERVATIONS

OH THE TREATMENT OF DISEA8EB OP THE GENERATIVE OBGAHB,

WITH ILLUSTEATIONS.

By albert H. HAYES, M.D.

No. 4 BuLFiNCH Street, Boston,
(Opposite Berere llouse,)

Doctor of Medicine, cliicf Consulting Pliysicittn of Peahody Medieal
Institntci Autlior of a Treatise on Diseases of the Throat anil
Lungs, Sexual Physiology of Woman and her Discasei,
k Treatise on Nerrout and Mental Diseases; late
Surgeon in the U. B. Army &c



BOSTON :

rCBLISBSD BT TnB PEAU0D7 UEDIOAL INSTITUTa.



Entered »ccordlng to Act of CongrcM, in the ye»r 1868, bj
A. H. HATES, In the Clerk'i Office of the DUtrlct Court ol
the DUtrict of Maasachnaetta.



X;ELLCOME INSTITUTE
\ LIOriARY


Coll.


'\weIMOmec


Call
No.


X .








\

\



"OF TH«

PEABODY MEDICAL INSTITUTE.



ALBERT HAMILTON HAYES, M.D.,

Chief ConsuUing Physician.

Gradaate of the Philadelpbia Univernity of Medicine atitl Sur-
gery; Honorary Member of the National Mediciil Association;
late Surgeon U. 8. Array; Author of the Science of Life, or
Self-preservation; Physiology of Woman and her Diseases;
Diaeasea of the Nervous System, or Pntholngy of the Nerves and
Nervous Maladies; late Edilor-in-Chicf of the Peabody Journal
•f Health, etc. etc.



WILLARD HUMBOLDT PARKER, M.D., F. R.C.S.

Chief Surgeon and Conmdting FhyHcian.

Oradtiate of the Harvard Medical College ; late Member of tho
Massachusetts Medical Society; Honorary Member of the Royal
Academy of Burgeons at Paris; Associate Member of the
American Medical Assoiiation ; late Surgeon U. S. Vols.; and
Correspondent of the British Medlco-Ohirurgical Review.



HIGHLY IMPORTAITT TO THE EEADEE.



MoRR than twenty years ago, after a careful and
tliorough course of medical instruction, both in Scot-
land and France, and years of extensive practice in
America, by which the author was brought largely in
contact with the alarming ills treated of in the main
portion of this book, he felt himself in duty bound to put
forth so much of the knowledge gained by this exhaus-
tive study and experience as could be comprised ^ this
concise and comprehensive volume; nor did his duty
to his suflfering fellow-man end there, conscious as he
was of the millions of painful sufferers throughout the
land. Therefore, from -this extensive experience and
observation, such as surely never before fell to the lot of
man, and through the advice of the greatest philanthro-
pist of this or any age, whose distinguished and honored
name the " Peabody Institute" bears, was established
this Institution for the especial and skilful treatment of
these most distressing maladies. That the high hopes
and great expectations of the author and pliilanthropist
have been fulfilled there is abundant testimony by
myriads of people who have been restored from the most
miserable physical condition to sound mental and bodily
health and happiness. There are more than twenty-five
thousand letters in the author's possession that bear evi-
dence of this, although it is fair to presume that only
a very small proportion of the restored would be likely
to bo heard from after being cured. And the National



Highly Important to the Eeadcr.



Medical Association, of which Dr. Hayes is an honored
member, have this year seen lit to present liim, as a
token of its recognition, and noticeable reward of pro-
fessional merit, with the most beautiful and expensive
gold and jewelled medal ever conferred upon any one,
be he prince or potentate. The author lias taken no.
pains whatever to secure this legion of testimonials,
but the great and sole aim of the author in this closing
notice is this: While Dr. Hayes* works have millions
of readers, thousands have been aroused thereby to a
consciousness of their danger and impending ruin,
and in consequence have applied to their nearest and
most available physician, perhaps a physician in general
practice, who, to do his best, could only " Pooh! pooh! "
at their sufferings and dangers, and is too egotistical or
vain to admit of his inability to treat them successfully;
or what perhaps may be even worse, they have applied
to some one of the numerous quacks who infest as ver-
min all our large cities, or travel through the country to
ensnare our too credulous youth. Furthermore, I take
this occasion to admonish one and all to shun the numer-
ous and bogus Medical Institutes that abound in this as
in other cities; not one of them is entitled to the least
degree of confidence. The managers, or self-styled doc-
tors thereof, could not cure you if they would, nor would .
not if they could; their only object is to dupe and rob
the suffering invalid. Much as I have seen of suffering
from disease, it has come far short of the terrible misery
and agony caused by the malpractice of these ignorant,
rapacious, un.scrupulous scoundrels, which has become
my daily and painful observation. The author of this
work, and the chief consulting physician of the " Pea-
body Medical Institute," Dr. Hayes, has called to liis
assistance the ablest medical and surgical talent of the



Highly Important to the Reader.



age. In addition to a thorough collegiate instruction in
the best universities in the world, they have had the
advantages of a careful, thorough, and long-continued
practical experience under the immediate instruction of
Dr. Hayes himself. Hence, to this Institution, and this
Institution alone, the invalid reader and nervous suf-
ferer can look, with the full and positive assurance of
restoration. Our means are ample and our resources
abundant. And while the poor, wretched victims of
onanism and all dependent nervous affections have been
inquiring almost despairingly, "Is there no balm in
Gilead? Is there no physician there?" that cry may
henceforth cease, and all who will may come and be
healed. Let my last words of solemn warning be, —
Avoid all Quacks, Charlatans, Empirics, Preten-
ders, AND Bogus Medical Institutes thboughodt

THE BeFUBUO.



PREFACE.

The motive which has led to the preparation and
publication of tliis volume, has been singly and solely a
desire to present to the public, and especially to yoimg
men, a treatise which shall furnish the most valuable
truths in reference to the physical organization of man,
and convey to the minds of enquii'ers information that
will enable them to avoid the terrible dangei'S to which
the unwary ai'e constantly exposed. The vast and va-
rious experience of the author of this work has filled
him with the liveUest appreciation of the awful conse-
quences that flow, in a broad and almost uninteiTupted
stream, from the neglect of the education of young
people upon matters of such vital importance to the
health and well-being of the human race aa those which
are treated in the following pages. Since the creation
of man these subjects have been of the deepest interest,
and, at this day, more than ever before in the world's
history, they are of the most momentous consequence
to mankind. With the increasing activities of the age
in which we live, the dangers that beset the young, and
even the middle aged and the old, are increased by a
neglect of tliose branches of physiology which relate to
the procreative faculty in man and woman. The cure



Preface.



of most of the maladies that flesh is heir to, although d
manifestly great moment, does not yet possess thai
vital interest which attaches to the ti-eatment of the
organs of generation ; for the diseases of the latter not
only are most painftil and destructive, but they afl'ect
the population of the eai'th, and their results reach for-
ward to generations yet unborn. Upon the kuowledgo
which is freely and fully imparted in this comprehensi^re
book, depends not only the pi-eseut health of those up( D
tlie earth, but the health, streugtli, and proper physic-.U
development ot thousands upon thousands ot their
descendants. It is, therefore, not only to prevent and
diminish the prevalence of the most wasting, obnoxious,
and terrible diseases that can fall upon man, that the a-a-
tlior of this work now gives it to the world, but also to
cut off, as far as may be, the dire evils that would flow
from those diseases, if left unchecked, down the line to
future generations. There is no malady in the whole
list of human ills to which quackery and empiricism
have been so extensively applied as the diseases which
flow from imprudence in sexual interco\irse ; and tliis
must be ascribed mainly to the general lack of knowl-
edge in young persons of their own ijhj'siological struc-
ture, and the nature of this special class of diseases.
Were all men and women properly educated in these
matters they would not only be enabled to avoid these
maladies, but if they should yet unfortunately contract
them they would not, as thousands now do, be made
victims of them until they are almost or quite past rem-
edy through that false delicacy which prevents them
from applying i)romptly to those who are competent to
effect their speedy cure.



Preface.

I have devoted so many years to the study and suo
cessful treatment of the diseases to which the organs of
generation are liable, and have acquired so thorough a
knowledge of their natiu-e and the certain method of
their cure, that I deem it my solemn duty to place before
the public so much of that Imowledge as can be con-
veyed through the printed pages of a comprehensive
treatise upon this important subject. As I cannot, in
the nature of things, attend pei'sonally to more than a
small fraction of the thousands of sufferers in the land,
I feel impelled to send abroad this work as a chart by
which a great multitude, setting out on the voyage of
life, may be enabled to avoid the rocks and quiclisands
wliich have proved the ruin of so many of their fellow-
men.

ALBEKT H. HAYES, M. D.
Physician and Surgeon,
Office, No. 4 Bulfinch St., Boston.



CONTENTS.



P>8«.

f*BEFACE, ..... ;2

DSEFUL PkESCKIPTIONS, —



Venebeal Diseases, —

Symptoms of Gonorrhoea or Clap, - 22

Swelled Testicle, - - - - 25

Irritable Bladder, ... - 27

Gleet, 29

Stricture, - . - - - 34
Symptoms and Treatmentof Venereal Disease
in its Local and Constitutional Fonns, and

the Use and Abuse of Mercury, - 40

Syphilitic Eeuptions os the Face, . 68

Destbuction of the Nose by Syphilis, and

Ulceb on the Cheek, . . .54

^ATOMY AUD PHYSIOLOGY OF THE GeNE^

ATiVE Obgans, ... 63



CONTEITTa.

Page.



PtjBERTT, — Manhood, —

The Morale of Generative Physiology, - 73

Generative Physiology, - - - 74

Eelations between the Sexes, - - 76

Sexual Development, - - - '^^ .

True Morality, - - . - 82

Natural Period of Development, - - 84

Empiricism, . - - - 86

The Physiology of Mabbiage, —

Aptitude and Inaptitude for "Wedded Happiness, 88

Perversion of Marriage, - - - 92

Avoidance of Calamity, - - - 98

Physiological Facts on Generative Capacity, 100

On Wedlock and Offspring, - - 103

On Physical Contrasts, - - - 107

In Connection with Marriage, - - 108

Physical Contrasts v. In-Breeding, - 110

Evils of In-Breeding, - - - IH
Matrimonial Disappointments Exemplified

and Treated, - ... - 112

Conjugal Precepts and Friendly Counsel, 114

Useful Truths, - - . - 117

Physical Infirmity, Ita Causes and Cure, 118

A Vigorous Posterity - - - 120

Bpeematorrh(ea, —

Its History and Causes, - - - 121

The Causes of Evil, - - - 122

The Sources of Evil, - - - 123

Dangers of Hypocrisy, - . - 125
Self-Abuse, ... 127, 174, 20-1

The Curse of Ignorance, and its Avoidance, 130



C0KTKNT8.



Proofs of the Extension of Vice, - 132

Venereal Imprudences illustrated In their

EITects, - - - - IM

The Miseries of Imprudence, - - 138

Miscellaneous Causes, - - - 140

Facts and Philosophy, . - . 142

BrMPTOMS OF Spebmatoekhoea ajtd Impo-
tence, - - - . 145
Nocturnal and Diurnal Discharges, - 146
Multiplicity of Symptoms, - - 149
Indications of Self- Abuse, - - 151
Seminal Weakness, - ■ _ 152
Influence of Spermatorrhoea, - - 154
Effects on the Mental Faculties, - - 150
Fatal Mistakes, - - - - 159

Causes and Effects of SrEBMATORKHoaiA, 160

The Mental and Generative Machinery, - 101

Spermatorrhoea and its Victims, - - 165

Self-Abuse and its Victims, - - 166

Seminal Losses, - 171

Seminal Weakness and Sexual Impotence, 182

Impotence and Sterility, - - - 188

Sexual Philosophy, - - - 197

On Generative Capacity, - - - 193

The Curse of Self-Abuse, - - 199

Impotence and Sterility, - - - 200

Generative Philosophy, - - - 203

Horrors of Self-Abuse, - - - 206

Sterility and Impotence, - - - 211

Affections of the Testicle, - - 218



CONTENTB.

Page.

Miscellaneous Causes, - - - 214
Effects on tlie Testicles, and Physiology of the

Organ, - - - - 216

Plain and Practical Truths, - - 218

On Symptoms and Effects, - - 219

Fiiendly Suggestions, _ - - 222

Detection of Spermatorkhcea, - - 223

Ancient Ignorance and Errors, - - 2'2,o

Indications for Detection, - - 226

Danger of Mistakes, ... 228

Qualification for Inquiry, - - 229

Means of Detection, - - - 231

Importance of Examination, - - 233

Mistakes of the Learned, » - 234

Pathological Failures, - - - 237

Morbid Complications, ... 238

Medical Errors, - - - - 240

Means of Cure, - - - 241

Cure for Body and Mind, - - 242

General, Remarks on the Treatment of

Spermatorrhcea, etc. - - 243

Urinary Indications, ... 245

True Principles of Treatment, - - 247

The Author's Principles, - - - 252

Inviolable Secrecy and Certain Relief, - 254

Remarks of the Press, - - . 285

Certificates, - - - 2G!)



To Patients and Invalid Readers,



Tht! followincr Prescriptions have proved, by the most

extensive experience, to Iw tlioronslily clScacious in tlie
tre;itineiit of the disHases, the nanies of wliich are ap-
pended to them. Tliey are written iu English, Latin
names and noientifio terms bein;;; purposely avoided, and
tlicy can Do obtained nt all reliable drug-stores through-
out the country. While the Following formulas are of
establislied merit, the reader .•^houlil bear well in mind
til it it is important that they be only applied for the
liiseases for which they are recommended, hence the
importance of a correct knowledge of their complaint
, before using them.

PllESCRIPTION No. 1.
R Tinct. Musk, 51.
Tiuct. Hoi)S, 5iii.
Liq. Potassae, jii.
Intus. Duelui, 5vi.
Mix: Three tahlespoonfuls after me.al.i.
Very useful in Indigestion attended with Nervousness and
Flatulence.

Prescription No. 2.

R Gum Arabic, 5i.
Water, Oiss.
Simple Syrup, 5ii.
Mix: A wineglass frequently.

In Stranguarij and Irritant Poisoning.

Prescription No. 3.
R Gum Arahii- mixture, 5iss,
Water, siiiss.
Syrup, 5ss.
Mix: A tablespoonful frequently.

In Bronchial Catarrh of Children.

Prbsoription No. 4.
R Gum Arabic mixture, 5ii«
Water, ^iv.
Syrup ToUm.

Orange Flower Water, aaji*
Mix: A tablespoonful every two hour.s.

Excellent in Slight Colds.



Prescriptions. IS

Pbksceiption No. 5.
R Vinegar, Ji.
Water, Jxv,
Sugar, 5ss.
Mix: To be taken as a common driuk.

Very useful in Fevers to allay thirst.

Prescription No. 6.

R Distilled Vinegar, 5ii.
Sviup, 5ss.
Water, I'd.
Mix: A fourth part every three hours.

In Scarlatina (for a child of three years).

Prescription No. 7.
R Dilute Acetic Acid, 5i.
Tiuct. Jalap, Itlxv.
Tiuct. Orauge Peel, 5i
Mixture Camphor, 3x.
Mix: Make a draught to be taken 2 or 3 times a day.

In Rheumatism in debilitated persons.

Prescription No. 8.
R Vinegar, gii.

Ammonia Muriate, 5L
Honey, Jiss.
Water, gxii.
Mix: Use as a gargle 3 or 4 times daily.

Good/or a Sore Throat.

Prescription No. 9.
R Lemon Juice, 5ii.

Camphor Mixture, Si.
Mix: Make a draught, to bo taken 3 times a day.

In Acute Rheumatism,

Prescription No. 10.
R Recent Lemon Juice, 5i.
Oil Sweet Almonds, giss.
Syrup Marshmallow, Sss.
Mix: A teaspooniul every 3 hours.

In Obstinate Diarrhot<u



14



Prescription$.



Prescription No. 11.
R Caniplior Mixture, 5i.
Sptg. EUi«r Coinp., 5ii.
Tiiict Cardanion Comp., Jir.
Spts. Anise, 3vi.
Oil Carroway, [Tlxii.
Syr. Ginger, Jii.
Peppermint Water, Jvss.
Mix: Take two tablespooufals.

J<'or Trmiblesome Flatulenct,



Prescription No. 12.
R Sulph. Morphia grs.ii.
Sulph. Soda, 3ii.
Syrnp Simple, 5ii.
Mix: Dose, i a small teaspoouful to au adult after each
discharge.

Invaluable in Dysentery.

Prescription No. 13.
R Liquid Tar.

Powd. Alum, aaSv.
Powd. Liquorice, q. s.
Mix: Divide into 100 pills. Take from 6 to 10 every day.

Excellent in Gonorrhoea.



Prescription No. 14.
R Camphor Mixture, Siss.

Liquid Acetate Ammonia, Ji''-
Wine Anti mony^et Potassia Tart, drops xl.
Tinct. Opium, drops xx.
Mix: Take half of the quantity ou retiring.

Very benejicial in Acute Jtheumatism,



Prescription No. 15.
R Antimony Potassia Tart., 1 gr.
Saltpetre, Jii.
Almond Mixture, Sxii,
Tinct. Camphor Comp., Jss.
Mix: Dose, a tablespoonful every hour.

Excellent Cough Mixture.



Prescriptions.



Prescription No. 16.
R Horse-radish Root.

Coiituaeil Muatard Seed, aaSiii.
Wiirni Water, 01.
dfacerate for au liour, and strain.
Colatiuse, Jvii.
Spts. Ammonia Arora., Jiss.
Spts. PimentJB, 5iii.
Mix: Two tablespoonfuls 3 times daily.

Very useful in Paralytia

Prescription No. 17.
R Tinct. Arnica.

Tinct. Capsicum, aft ji-
Chloroform, pure, 5ii.
Tiuct. Sapo fit Opii, 5iv.
Mix: and mark external use.

Ezcellent in Bruises and Sprains.

Prescription No. 18.

R Ungt. Belladonna, 5i.
Powd. Cam ph., 5'-
Mix : Mark external use.

In painful Chords or Pile^

Prescription No. 19.

R Bromide Potussa, 3iii.
Cinnamon Water, Ji.
Mix: Dose, a teaspoonful as occasion may require.

Useful in Headache, or to produce Sleep.

Prescription No. 20.
R Infusion Buchu, Jvii.
Trnct. Buchu.
Tinct. Cubeb.s, aa 3iv.
Mix: Dose, 2 tablespoonfuls 3 times a day.

Useful in Kidney Difflcultiee.

Prescription No. 21.

R Fresh Milk, Os.s.
Lime WatcM-, Ji.
Mix: Four tablespoonfuls is a dose.

Useful in Sour Stomach.



16



Prescriptions.



Pkeschittion No. 22.

R Tinct. Spanish Flies, drops il.
Titict. Henbane, III v.
Water, 5x.
Mix: Dose, tablespoouful every 2 hours.

Useful in. Inability to hold Urine, or Paralysis oftht
Bladder.

Presceiption No. 23.

R TlTict. Spanish Flies.

Tinct. Camphor Comp, aaSi.
Tinct. Cinchona Conip., 5x.
Mix: Dose, 30 drops, gi-adually increased to a tea.spoon-
ful, 3 times a day.

Beneficial in WJwoping Cough.

Prescription No. 24.
R Acet. Spanish Flies, 5ss.
Aqua Cologne, 5 i.
Aqua Eosae, 5i.
Mix: Make a wash. Eub on the liead when the hail
falls out.



PltESCRrPTION No. 25.

R Powd. Ki^d Pepper, 5ii.
Boiling Water, Oss.
Mix: Strain, and when cool take a teaspoonfnl 3 times
» day.

Useful in Malignant Sore Throat.

Presckittion No. 26.
R Elix. Peruvian Bark witli Protox. Iron, Sxii.
Dose, a dessert-spoonful after meals.

An Agreeable Tonic.



Prescription No. 27.

R Liqnid Acetate Ammon., 5ii.
Sweet Spirits Nitre, 5iii.
Aqua Camphor, 5ss.
Syr. Simplex, 5iv.
Mix: Dose, a teaspoonfnl every 3 hotirs.

Very benqficial at the commencement of Fevers.



Prescriptions.



IT



Phesokiption No. 28.

R Powd. Peruvian Bark.

Powd. Rhubarb, Turkish, aaSas.
Carbonate Magnesia, 't)i.
Coufeot. Aromat. Bss. No. 1.

Cinnamon Water, Siss.
Mix: Make a draught. To be taken twice a day.

Excellent Cathartic

Pkesckiption No. 29.

R Sulphate Magnesia, 5ii. No. 2.

Fluid 15xt. Senna, 5vii.
Simple Syru)), 5ii.
Mix : Take all at one draught.

An Excellent Physic



Peesceiption No. 30,

R Bals. Copaiba.

Liquid Potas.sae, aaSiii.
Wucil. Gum Arabic, 51.
Peppermint Water, 5vi.
Mix: A tablespooiiful before meals.

Excellent in first stages of Gonorrhoea.



" Prescription No. 31.

R Ammoniated Tartrate of Iron, 5i.
Water, 5vs.s.
Siniple Syrup, 5ss.
Mix: Dose, tablespoonful 3 times a day.

Beneficial in Bright' s Disease.



Prescription No. 32.

R Ext. Henbane, 5ss.
Valerianate Ferri, Si.
Mix: Divide in 30 pills; dose, 1 after meals.

Excellent ia Neuralgia,



18 Prescriplinna.

Presceiption No. 33.
R Bromide Ferri, 3i.
Syrup'Oraiige, 5ss.
Orange Water, 5iss.
Mix: Dose, teaspooiiful every G hours.

Useful in Secondary Syphili$,

Prescription No. 34.
R Sulph. Ferri, Si.

Distilled Water, %xvi.
Mix: Make wash, apply on liuen every 2 or 3 hours.

Ey,cellent in Erysipelas.

I'rescription No. 35.
R Powd. Galls, 5i.
Sulphate Copper 9i.
Lard, Si-
Mix : Make ointment, applj' to the affected part 3 time§
ft day.

For liinf/worm.

Prescription No. 36.
R Extract Oeutian.

Sesquicarboiiate Ammonia, aa3i.
Mix: Divide into 30 pills; dose Two, 2 or 3tiraes daily.

In Obstinate Ilearlbum.

Prescription No. 37.

R Glycerine.

Ro.se Wat.er, aaSii.
Pow<l. P>orax, 9ii.
Mix: Apply at bedtime.
An excellent application for Chapped Hands, Chilblains,
and <b'ore Nipples.

Prescription No. 38.

R Ext. Henbane.
Oatiiplifir.

Ext. Jlopw, aa, grs.iii.
Mix: Make 2 pills; take at bedtime.

In simple Watchfulnets,



Prescriptions. 19

PKEScnrPTioN No. 39.

R Tiuct. lodiuo Comp., Ji-
Make external use; apply with a brush thrice daily.

Excellent Application to Swollen JointB.

Prescbiption No. 40.

U Powd. Peruvian Bark, Red, 5i.
Lard, 5ii.

Mix: Make ointment; use 3 times a day on linen.

The best Salve for Sores and Ulcers.

Pkesceiption No. 41.

R Powd. Dovers, grs.xl.

Hyd. Sub. Murias., grs viii.
Mix: Divide into 8 powders; 1 in every 3 hours if
iwake.

Excellent in Pneumonia or Lung Fever.

Pbeschiption No. 42.

R Powd. Ipecac Root, grs.iv.
Mucilafje Gum Arabic.
Simple Svruj), aa5ii.
Distilled Water, 5i.
Saltpetre, grs xv.
Mix: Two teaspooul'uls every 4 hours.

In Measles of Infants.

Prescription No. 43.

R Dover's Powd.

Hyd. Cum Creta, aagrs.i.
Mix: To be taken at bedtime.

Excellent in the Diarrhaa of Teething Infants.

Pbescbiption No. 44.

R Orouod Flaxseed, 5iv.

Or()U[i(i Poppy Flowers, li.
Mix: Divide in 8 poultices; use a fresh one morning
and evening.

Excellent Poultice for a Felon,



20 Prescriptions.

Prescription No. 45.



R Tiuct. Lobelia, Jss.
Oi-iiiiK(i Water, g ii.
Distilled Water, 5iv.
Mix: Dose, a tiiblespoouful 3 times a day.

Beneficial in Asthma.

Prescription No. 46.

R Carbouate Magaesia, 9i.

Tiiioi. Carda.mon Comp., 3ii.
Oraiif^e Water, 5ss.
Syruj), 3ii.

Mix: Dose, a teasjjoouful frequently during the day.

EzcelletU in ihe Colic of Infant*.

Prescription No 47.

R Cod Liver Oil, 5iv.

Eiuulsiou Almonds, 5i.
Whiskey, gii
Mix: Dose, a tablespoonful after meals.

Very Beneficial in Consumption.

Prescription No. 48.

R Sweet Oil, gviii.

Arom. Spts. Ammonia, 3ii.
Mix: Dose, 3 teaspooufiils niglit and morning.

Good to Expel and Destroy Wormt. -

Prescription No. 49.

R Citrate Iron et Quinine, Jiii.
Sherry Wine, 5
Mix: Dose, a teaspoonful before meals.

An Excellent Tonic

Prescription No 50.

R Tinct. Peruvian Bark.
Tiuot. Gentian.
Tinct. Cardainon, aaSi.
Essence Ciie(5kerberry, gtts.xxx.
Mix: Doso, a teaspoonful before meals.

Excellent in a Capriciou* Appetite



Prescriptions.



21



Prescription No. B1.

R "Wine of Ipecac, 5i.

Dose, a teaspoonful to children in convulsions. This
is an invaluable remedy, and always sate to administer,
care being taken not to strangulate the patient from
inability to swallow.

The reader must bear in mind that the use of the fore-
going remedies is only for adults, and that the author
has purposely refrained from giving any formulie for the
diseases mentioned chiefly in this treatise, from the fact
that nervous diseases are the most insidious, painful, and
destructive that afflict the population of the earth, and
the remedies therefore are most potential, and might
properly be classed as edge-tools in medicine. Apropos
to this subject, I would here quote the statement of the
eminent Professor of Anatomy and Physiology at Har-
vard Medical College to the Fellows of the Massachu-
setts Medical Society, "that medicine as they practised
it (that is, the physicians in general or family practice)
did more harm than good; and if all the drugs they
used were thrown into the .sea, it would be all the better
for their patients, but all the worse for the fishes."
From the daily observations of the author he can fully
corroborato the sentiments of this outspoken, truthful,
and learned gentleman ; myriads of broken-down,
wretched invalids are constantly crowding upon his
attention, whose misery and wretchedness are owing
wholly or in part to the ignorance of ijrevious medical
advisers, and he feels constrained to adnioui.sh invalids
of this class to confide the treatment of their case to
none except those who devote their whole energy and
abilities to the treatment of nervous disea-ses, and who
give undoubted evidence of their superior qualifications.



V1ENEREAL DISEASES.



Of TOE SYMrxOMS AND TREATMENT OF v UXOR-
BHCEA, (or clap,) GLEET, STRICTURE, ERR] ■'ABLE
BLADDER, SWELLED TESTICLES, &C.

Venereal intercoure is occasionally impure, and there
are animal poisons generated and communicated i y this
intercourse, of a peculiarly malignant character. One
is the poison of GoNoiiRnoEA, (the disease vulgarly
termed Clap,) which, falling on the mucous membrane
of the urethra, produces from that surface a discharge
of infectious matter; the other, or poison of syphilis,
being applied to the surface of the skui, or (as far as is
known at present,) to any surfiice, produces local Inflam-
mation and ulceration, forming a sore which is called a
Chancre. The discharge from this being re reived
into the absorbent glands, occasions a swelling, which
has been named Bubo, and from the transmission of the
poison into the circulation there arise, respective. y, in-
flammation and ulceration in the throat, on tlie skin, in
the membranes, investing the bones, and even in those
solid bodies themselves.

If a healthy individual have sexual intercourse wiUi
another laboring under chronic mucous discharge as
the result of gonorrhosal inflammation, infection, though
not absolutely certain, is most likely to arise ; but no
rule can be laid down with regard to the time tliat a



Venereal Diseases.



28



ci.AP will take before it makes its appearance after in-
fection has been conveyed.

In some instances three or four days elapse, in others
there Avill not be tlie least appearance of irritation be-
fore the expiration of ten or even fourteen days ; and
Sir Astley Cooi^er, with other writers, record as nianj
weeks. Most commonly, however, the disease is per
ceptible in the space of from six to twelve days. In th(
males it commences witli a sense of nneasiness, or ting-
ling about tlie extremity of the penis ; often a tlu-illing
sensation, not of an unpleasant character, and nearlj
allied to the venereal oestrum. Presently tliis is ex-
changed for itching and soreness, and then a drop of
fliud escapes witliout effort; the attention is called to
the part, and it is found the lips of tlie urethra are
swollen and inflamed, a whitish, glutinous, and nearly
transparent fluid exuding fi-om its orifice. At first the
discharge from the passage is mucous, but afterwards it
assumes a decidedly purulent appearance, that is, re-
sembling " matter." This becomes yellow, or if the
inflammatory symptoms run high, green, and it is often
mtcrmixed and streaked with blood. I say resembling
matter, for the fact is, that even in these aggravated
cases the discharge contains little beyond the altered
mucous secretion of the part. The time this augmented
diseased secretion will continue to discharge, is quite in-
dcflnite. Some people assert it will wear itsell"out; one
tiling is certain, it will sooner wear out the suflerer;
besides, the doctrine is dangerous, inasmuch as it over-
looks the PERMANENT CONSEQUENCES of a disCHSe SUp-

posed to pass away. Thickening of the mucous
membrane of the urLiiary canal is one of the conse-



24



Venereal Diseases.



quences of long protracted and neglected clhp, and tliis
state of parts lays the foundatiou, if not identical with
STBiCTUiiE. Or the discharge may cease to present its
usual characters and leave a surl'ace prone to the secre-
tion of a thin ichorous fluid, termed Glebt. It is
obvious, then, that no folly can be greater than that cf
suffering the disease to end, as many others are apt to do,
by terminating in another; and that other often of a
permanently incurable character. Besides these eflects
on the lu-ethra, gonon-hoea takes a course internally.
It does not couflne itself to the lips of the m'ethra, but
often produces an erysipelatous inflammation and swell-
ing of the glans and foreskin, occasioning efl^'usion and
the- formation of the diseases termed Phymosis and
Pabaphymosis, in the former of which the foreskin
cannot be drawn back to cover the end of the penis ; in
the latter, the prepuce forming a tight ring at the back
Df the glan cannot again be brought forward. The pais
and strangulation in this state of the parts are exces
sive, and demand prompt surgical interference. The
gland of the groin often becomes affected from sym-
pathy. We say fi-om sympathy, in contradistmcf ion to
that swollen state of the inguhial glands, resulting from
the transmission of syphilitic matter, as occurs in the
aggravated forms of venereal disease. In the first in-
stance the glands swell, but not the same range of
glands as are liable to be affected with sjqjhilitic bubo;
and there is also this distinction, that while in the latter
case thej almost invariably burst, the gland that is sym-
pathetically inflamed during the progress of gonorrhaa
never or very seldom inflames to suppuration. Where
this takes place from gonorrhoea, several glands of U'«



Venereal Diseases.



25



groin are ai.t to be aflected in succession'; whereas, in
tlie absori)tioa of tlie poison of sypliilis, a single gland
only is enlarged on each side. In the course of the
disease, swelliugand suppiu-ation often ake place in tlie
mouths of those lacunos, which, like dilated pouches,
are situated chiefly near the canal. Matter becomes
accumulated there, and this place appears to constitute
the last entrenchment of the diseased action. Irritation
and inflammation occur also in the spongy bodies
forming tlie bulk of the penis, tlius constituting that
painful aSection termed Chokdke, in which the penis
becomes paitiaUy erect, and feels as curved and bound
down, so as to prevent its complete extension. This, of
course, is a temporary though intensely agonizmg pre-
dicament, and generally takes place in the night,
accompanied with great pain, preventing the patient
fi'om sleeping. When the parts are not occupied with
much inflammation, few, or none of the last symptoms
v/ill appear, and only a discharge of a specific character,
with a slight lieat or scalding in making water, will
prevail. The Eensatioii of scalding varies much in
intensity in different individuals, and frequently abates
or passes off altogether where the discharge has become
established. Generally, from the adjacent part synipa-
Uiising with those already aflected, the patient feels a
sensation of uneasiness, and dragging down about the
thighs and flmdament. One of the most painful conse-
quences arising in the course of gonorrhoja, is the
occmrence of Swelled Testicle. From the siato-
nicnts alFordcd in the anatomical section of tliis work,
it will be seen there is a true continuity of mucous
luiface from the m-ethra along the cord to the testicles,



20 Venereal Diseases.

and it is along this surface that gonorrhoeal inflamma-
tlou occasionally creeps, giving rise to horribly paiiirj
eulai-gement of one or both these organs. The testicle
Is enveloped in a dense fibrous capsule, which does nol
readily yield to distension; hence the pain when
enlargement is produced by inflammatory action. In
conse(iuence of this, there will be excruciating agony
extending into the small of the back, heat, restlessntss ,
and symptomatic fever; a furred tongue, tliirst, quick
pulse, and great depression of the vital energies. It not
unfrequently happens that the swollen testicle suppu-
rates and bursts ; and whether this occur or not, it i
certain that on the subsidence of disease, its functions
as a secretory gland in the production and elimination
of the seminal fluid are by no means enhanced by all
this mischief. But of all the consequences of gonorhoea
which tell most fatally upon the comfort of married life,
and interfci'e most decidedly with the procreative ener-
gies, the formation of steicture is most to be dreaded.
Spasmodic strictuke occurs during the progress of
CLAP, and is pioduccd by temporary spasms of the
muscles surrounding the membranous portion of tlie
urinary canal. Inklammatory stricture generally
succeeds acute gonorrhoea, and consists in the effusion
of adhesive matter around the canal; while pkrma-
NKNT STRICTURE is the Tcsult of the thickening of the
urethi-a, and consequent narrowing of the canal from a
Blow inflammatory process. There are many cases ol
permanent stricture besides gonorrhoeal inflammation
ftud while speaking of this, it will be well to enumerate
them. No one is more frequent than excessive prolon-
gation in venereal intercourse. Its constant efl'ect is



Venereal Diseases.



27



the exhaustion of tlie energy of the musciilar rlbres;
thus are they thrown into regular action, and perma-
nent contraction of some part of the passage is thereby
Inihiced. Indeed, so strong is this effect that symptoms
of spasmodic stricture have been known to arise ia
yiomc patients after every repetition of venereal inter-
course, especially if due time for repose has not been
airordcd for the secretory organs; and though these
symptoms at first were found on examination, not to be
the effect of permanent stricture, yet this was generally
produced in the end, and proved most troublesome ia
;ts removal. Masturbation, in this way, produces the
lame, or worse effects, than severe venereal effort.
Spasmodic stricture then, or that too violent excitement
of the muscles around the neck of the bladder, whether
arising from self-pollution, venereal excesses, or inflam-
mation of mismanaged or neglected clap, may, and
often does, terminate in permanent constriction of the
urinary canal. At the commencement of the formation
of permanent stricture, the surgeon is made acquainted
with the real nature of the complaint by the following
indications : The first is the retention of a few drops
of urine in the urethra, after the whole appears to be
discharged. The patient, although the stream of urine
may be somewhat diminished, feels no particular uneas-
iness until he perceives some difficulty in its expulsion.
The effort is gi-eater than usual, and straining continues
even after the bladder is emptied. Occasional irregu-
larities from cold, indulgence in drink, or change ol
weather, and even very trifling causes, are sufficient to
cause the urine to pass only by drops, or for a time to
be totally obstructed. The bladder, in the progress



28



Venereal Diseases.



'.Wh (disease, becomes irritable; this is evinced by th«
persou not being able to sleep so long as customary,
without rising to ellect the uiinary discharge. A man
n health will sleep for seven, eight, or nine hours,
R'ithout bemg obliged to empty his bladder; but if he
abor under stricture, he cannot continue foi a longer
period than four or five hom-s, and frequently nuich
•ess than this. A patient of mine, who occasionally
'but not often) gets tipsy over night, invariably sends
for my aid to pass the catheter next morning ; the man
h the subject of stricture, and frequently rises in the
r ight to evacuate his bladder ; M'hen under the influence
f f intoxicating fluids, he sleeps insensible to the stimu-
li IS of an irritable yet distending bladder, and the result
#n waking is a complete powerlessness to eflect its
n'dinary discharge. The next circumstance observable
31 the progress of permanent stricture, is the forked
division of the urinary stream, the reason of which is
deducible fi-om the uneven, irregular, and swollen, as
well as contracted state of the urethra. The urine
cannot be ejected to the usual and natural distance,
although the patient be sensible of the bladder making
more than usual exertions. Sometimes it assumes a
Bpu'al or twisted direction. Even the thread-like
stream, conspicuous in the advanced stage of stricture,
ollen gives place to a discharge by mere drops, attended
by the strongest efforts and the most excruciating pain.
'I'lie coats of the bladder become enormously thickened;
tliere is dilation behind the place where stricture
occiu-s, (which is commonly the inembranous portion
of the urethra anterior to the prostate gland;) the
ureters, or canals, leading from the kidneys to the



Venereal IHseases.



20



bladder, become distended and dilated, and the kidneys
tliemselves, tlie secretory organs ol" tlie urine, become
diseased. Many of tliese appearances, if not all, are
attributable to the existence of a physical impediment,
a narrowing or STEiCTUiiU, of a portion of the urinary
canid — and if viewed in connection witli the obligation
of marriage, are mrst grave in their consequences.

Gleet is one of the sequelis of Clap, and i.. often
exceedingly dilBcult of removal, sometimes contiuuing
for years. The discharge becomes chronic, its character
is altered; and from being purulent it is nowsemi-trans-
paient. Its persistence mostly depends on the co-exist-
ence of strictm'B in some portion of the canal. The
term " GonoiThcea " is derivable from the Greek, and
signifies, hterally, a flow of seed; the earlier writers
mistaking the mucous discharge, occmiing in clap, for
the all-important seminal fluid. " Blcnnoi'hagia," a flow
of mucous, is the more; correct classical iiame, synony-
mous with the " Claud-Pisse," hot urine, of the French,
or " Clap," of the vernacular English. Timoaus relates
that a yoimg law student, the victim of self-pollutiou,
was " seized with a Gonorrlioaa, accompanied with
weakness of the whole body." He observes: "I
looked upon the gonorrhoea as a sequel of the relaxar
lion of the seminal vessel," and truly his i-easoning was
coiTCct ; but as to the discharge termed by him, Gonor-
riioej., it was neither the involuntary escape ol semen,
nor the infectious matter, correctly indicating the exist-
ence of clap, but a gleety discharge from the pi-ostate,
vesiculaj seminale and urethral surface, — certainly very
analagous in character to the chronic eflusion superveri'
Ing on stricture from neglected clap.



so



Venereal Diseases.



There is an exceeding distressing affection ft-equently
resulting Vroiu gonori'lirea, and tliereby fitly to be intro-
duced in this ijliicu, named by surgoons — "Irrilalile
bladder." I say, freciuently arising in this way, but it
may also proceed from certain solitary practices; in
fact, is closely ideutilied with all the habits of sensiud-
ism. The patient is annoyed by a frequent desue to
void his urine, and this symptom becomes ultimalely
so urgent that the inclination to erajjty the bladder oc-
curs as often as every ten or lifteen minutes. The pain
experienced is in exact ratio v,'ith the detension of the
bladder, and sometimes the urine is discharged mixed
with blood. Irritable bladder is a dreadfid disorder;
the patient's life is a burden to him; he is obliged to
keep from society and linger away his hours in solitude.

The late Sir Astley Cooper relates the case of a young
gentleman, who, being in company with a party of la-
dies, w;is about to leave them for the purpose of mak-
ing water, having at the moment a strong desire; in
the greatest agony he rode with them some miles : when
endeavoring at the end of his journey to evacuate his
bladder, to his utter astonishment he could not pass a
di'op ; a sui-geon was sent for, who took away the urine
by means of a catheter, but from suppuration supeiTcn-
ing upon an irritable bladder he shortly died from ex-
haustion. Next to those cases which occurred in con-
nection with gonorrhoeal inflammation, the most fre-
quent instances of this irritable condition of the organ
occur, as the result of excessive venereal indulgence in
advanced life or self-pollution in youth.

In j'efiirence to the treatment of gonorrhoeal affec-
tions, little need be added. What I wish to state re-



Ven&i'eai Diseases.



SI



lates ti"> the necessity of the avoidance of its misman-
Bgemeut. Tlie deplorable results of this form of vene-
re.-il disease, just recited, arc easily averted by common
care and prudence; but from negligence, or in the
hands of uiiskilfid surgeons, the most calamitous con-
sequences not uufrequently arise. Among the most
common of those cases which precipitate these second-
ary diseases, may be enumerated the use, or rather the
abuse of mercury, (wliich by unanimous consent has
long since been banished fi'om the scientific treatment
of gonorrhoea,) the employment of stimulant resins, as
turpentine, cubebs, or the balsam of copaiba, before
the subsidence of the inflammatory or acute stage ; but
principally the mismanagement of astringent or irritat-
ing injections. These, liowever usefid or necessary in
the chronic stage of the complaint, undoubtedly tend,
by destroying the discharge, to fix the specilic diseased
action >mon the testicles, producing inflammation and
enlargement — nay, frequently disorganization there; —
consequences far more to be dreaded than the original
mischief. For it must carefully be noted, that to arrest
the flow of morbid mucus is not to cure the disease.
Inflammation of a specific kind, in this instance relieves
itself, or terminates in a discharge of a peculiar secre-
tion from the inflamed surface ; and it is only by chang-
ing or destroying that diseased action of the vessels,
wiiich produces the discharge, that a cui'c can rationally
expected to be efiected. Gonnorrhosa attains its cri-
sis more uninterruptedly in a full than in a languid
iiabit; but extremes of both are sources of aggravation ;
tlie first as regards mtensity, the second as regards time.
The science of surgery affords no means by which a con«



S2



Venereal Diseases.



Armed clap can be suddenly arrested in its career, and
the attempt, if made, is frequentJy productive of evi]
results. The tre.'itment will necessarily be motUlied by
the date, the intensity of the disease, and the consUtu-
tional peculiarities of the subject; and hence, though
most of the remedies be well known, yet, in Iheir ai>-
plication they requh-e that discrimination which rend-
ers it necessarily unwise and unsafe that a nvxn should
venture to treat his own case ; and the records of oui
practice attest much serious mischief that has arisen in
Uiis way. For a period of at least one week, the treat-
ment should be strictly palliative; the diet shotdd be
moderately reduced, the bowels relaxed, (but not vio-
lently irritated by dr;istic purgatives,) the local inflam-
mation mitigated by frequent fomentations and rest
The smarting which occurs in evacuating the bladder
arises not from any change in the chemical constituents
of the mine, but from tlie circumstance of its having to
pass over an inflamed and higliiy sensitive sm-face ; so
when the eye is inflamed, light, which constitutes its nat-
ural stimulus, becomes intolerable. This smarting may
be much alleviated by taking about tliirty drops of the
solution of potassa three times a day, with sixty drops
of the tincture of the herb Fedoni, (Avhicb neutralizes
the acid the urine naturally contains,) combined with
« few di'ops of the tincture of Opium, besides which
nucilaginons and diluent di-inks certainly render the
arine less stimulating. The activity of the dise:ise being
ixhausted, and the acute stage of uiflammatory excite-
<ient subsiding, under judicious management the im-
jirovement will be indicated by a diminution of ])ain hi
iiakiug water, and in the quantity of the discharge,



Venereal Diseases.



S3



which becomes paler in color and more watery in con-
Bistence.

In order to effect these salutary changes, there is no
necessity for the admimstration of mercury, as was ouce
the practice. Formerly it was thought there is a set of
constitutional sj-mptoms supervening upon the local clis-
rase, (in the same way as venereal sore tlu-oa*^ follows
neglected syphilitic chancres;) that gonnorho^a consti-
tuted only a variety of syphilitic disease, and tliat mer-
cury was absolutely necessary for its cure in every form.
Modern science has, however, dispelled this illusion ; —
there are some accidental complications, but no dis-
tinctly regular secondai-y symptoms, resulting from
Gonorrhoea. The first stage then iiassed, the treatment
should undergo a coiTcsponding change, otherwise the
disease will pass into Gleet, and become tediously pro-
tracted ; should Chordee, of which we have spoken, inter-
rupt the healthy progress of the case, in all probabUity
the cure will be more or less delayed, inasmuch as this
painful symptom indicates a liitherto inflammation of the
urmary canal, extending to the spongy tissue forming
tlie body of the penis. Chordee is a common symptom
of vlap, and the general mode of treating it is a combin-
ation of calomel and opium, the abstraction of blood
froni tlie arm, and the warm bath, &c., but it will invar-
iably yield to an ointment composed of the foUowir.^
ingredients, applied along the dorsum of the penis —
Sirg. M.«r. Oiiit. i oz. — Pulv. Opi. 10 grs. — Pi Iv.Cum. idrchm.



84



Venereal Diseasta.



STlilCTXTRE,

As to tlie treatment of Stricture there are three indl- ,
catious in its cure : one to produce the requisite physi-
cal dUatiou of the constricted canal ; another method is,
the attempt to produce absorption of the thickened
organized lymph surrounding the m-ethras ; and a third
is a mechanical destruction of the sti icture. Ehistic or
solid instruments, cautii^usly introduced, will often effect
the original dilations ; medicine will sometimes succeed
in promoting the cure by absorption, and destructive
caustic will form a new passage through the thickened
parts, when less powerful agencies have failed.

It is certain that these means are strictly surgical, and
perhaps, in the whole ro\md of operative science, there
is nothing demanrUug a more minute acquaintance with
the unseen anatomy of the parts than the treatment of
stricture; none in which blundering rashness or ignor-
ance may effect more deplorable mischief. The bougie
or catheter may be forced into the bulb of the uretlira,
or tear its way into the substance of the prostate gland ;
and death may ensue from unrelieved distension of the
bladder, and the irritation superveiiing upon the injury.
The use of caustic has been much abused, and indeed
ought never to be employed, except in those exlreuie
cases which sm'gical discrimination alone can detect and
justify.

All the diseases of this unhappy c'ass are of a compli-
cated and varied nature ; they embrace, in their co/"e-
quencos, so many painfid diseases, that I never consider
tliem, however slight in appearance, as mere local effects.



Venereal Diseases.



35



but always di-ead their approach to a constitulional
character ; for, by a dejjlorable fatality, to which limit
Is iinliiiowu, die most trivial cases of these diseases be-
come tlie fruitful mine of a thousand discordant feelings
and symptoms, that harass their devoted victim for an
infinite period; therefore, I strongly recommend, in all
cases, a minute investigation, in order that the remedies
may be effective on their onset; the choice of which
remedies must be governed by the symptoms, constitu-
tion, and habits of the patient, bearing in mind that in
diseases of this liind, large evacuations of any character
are to be carefully guarded against; for in all cases
they have done injury by producing either irritability
of the stomach or the bowels, and thus rendering the
system unequal to the retention of the necessary reme-
dies. Let not the non-medical readers imagine that
the foregoing sketch of gonorrhceal disease and its con-
eequenres is intended to place the method of cure
v^ithin their own grasp; let such a one apply for medical
aid on. the first outbreak of suspicious symptoms ; by so
doing he will save himself a world of anxiety, arising
fiom tlie fear of going wrong in the adoption of the
c\.rative plan of treatment. In fact, all tliat relates to
tll^^ management of the consequences of gonorrhceal
Inflammation, as for instance, gleet, strictures, swelled
testicle, and other olrscure, yet pauiful, aflections of the
(iriuarv organs, is strictly surgical ; the definition ol
Ihose principles could little avail the general reader,
whose interest is best consulted by referring hun directly
and at once, not to books, which could only confuse a
mind ignorant of anatomical matters, but to tliat prac-
titioner who has made sexual diseases his exclusive
Btudy.



VEIfEREAL DISEASES.



Op the Symptoms Am) treatment of the Vb-
NEKEAL Disease in its Local and Constitu-
tional Forms, and the use and abuse ov
Mercury.

I have already observed that animal poisons differ,
not merely in their intensity, but in their nature ; that
some conlhio their agency to the surface, where the con-
taminating virus is originally applied, producing rather
a peculiarity of disordei'ed action than diseased change
ol" structure; the constitution sympatliizing little, and
distant parts remaining unaffected, such is the poison of
clap; but the virus of sj-philis or pox produces local
destru ction of the surface, and, from absorption, the
whole mass of circulating blood becomes much diseased.
After an indefinite period, and even after the local
sores are healed, the throat, the nose, the skin, bones,
become often successively imphcated, and if neglected
or maltreated, death may, and not unfrequentlj' does,
arise from its invasion. The local sores alRcthig tlie
surface of the external genitals from impure intercourse,
are denominated chancres, sometimes single, occasion-
ally more than two or even tliree are present. The
time at which the effect of the poison producing these
ulcerations makes its presence evident is very imcer-
tain ; gcuprally spoakir.g, chancre >»*kes its appearance




SYPHILITIC EKTJPTIONS.



Venereal Diseases.



thr«e or four days after impui'e sexual contact; fi'om
five to twenty days forming the average period. An
iullamed spot is first perceptible, presently a small pim-
ple bursts and displays a rapidly-enlarging ulcerated
Bmface. In the centre of the sore an excavation is
sometimes observable, of considerable magnitude, ex-
tending beneath the sldn, exquisitely sensitive and
painful, erysipelatous redness surrounding tlie ulcer,
and the skin assuming an unusual firmness. The edges
of that sore are m egular, its form often oval, but hard
and ragged, its surface yellow, and the feeling of solidity
easily perceptible if the part be grasped between two
fingers. In fact, the thickened base is a distinguislnng
peculiarity of syphilitic sores. If a chancre has not
penetrated the skin, it heals under' the application of
proper topical and internal ti'eatment, but if once the
skin be perforated by destructive ulceration — if the
)elluliir tissue underneath partake of the diseased
action, it becomes mitable, sloughs, or mortifies, and is
atttinded with danger. When a syphilitic sore is con-
fined to the surface of the sldn, its progress is slow, and
it is comparatively easy of cme ; if, on the contrary, it
burrows deeply into the integuments, slou^.ing may be
expected to be extensive, and the immediate constitu-
tional and febrile symptoms will run high. Syphilitic
sores or chancres vary exceedingly in character ; this
variety is not only produced by previous mode of living,
and constitution of the patient, but is undoubtedly
ascribable to diversities in the nature of the poison.
If two persons differing in irritability absorb the same
virus, the more ii'ritable subject of the two will present
a sore surrounded by violent inflammation, so that a



48



Venereal Diseases.



person laboring under simple sores to-day, if he indulge
to-morrow in any act of intemperance or debauchery,
will change by that imprudence the aspect and ten-
dency of the ulcer. In some unfortunate instances we
have clap co-existent with chancre ; however, the mat-
ter of gonorrhoea will not produce chancre, nor will the
Becretion from a chancre originate clap; proving not
the identity, but the diversity and the possible absoq>
tion of two poisons. Besides these, there are sorea
(believed to be followed by constitutional and secondary
symptoms,) produced by the contact of men whose con-
stitutional condition is peculiar with women, whose
genital organs secrete a simply irritating fluid, as the
whites, the diseased menstrual seci etion, or indeed any
impure secretion of a purilbrm chai-acter.

It happens, not unfrequently, males become inlected
with troublesome and suspicious sores from intercourse
with women, whose purity is undoubted; nay, even
from contact with their own wives at certain periods.
These views are fast gaining upon the confidence of the
profession, and the result is most salutary, inasmuch as
it was formerly the practice to style every sore, witliout
exception, syphilitic, to apply mercury mdiscriminately ;
and (to say nothing of the injurious moral imputation,)
mercuriiil remedies unnecessarily and injudiciously
applied, have frequently created a diseased condition,
mistaken for the undoubted effects of the syj^hiUtic
vivas itself.

Healthy women, in whom not a vestige of actual dis-
ease could be traced, upon examination, and so pro-
nomiced, have, undoubtedly, in consequence of some
diseased Doculiarity, totally unconnected with uncliast#



Venereal Diseases.



49



Intercourse, communicated, by after contact with their
husbands or lovers, actual sores closely resembling the
previously recognised forms of venereal disease. These
ulcers, wliich- are perfectly simple in character, may be
reasonably referred to tlie presence of matter irritating
the surface applied, and co-operating with a constitu-
lion prone to the promotion of that peculiar form ot
local mischief.

Many authors favor the opinion that appears to be
warranted by facts, that there exists, not one poison of
a specific venereal Idnd, but many. If the poisons tiiat
respectively produce clap and chancre be evidently dis-
tinct, forming two, who shall say that the limitation
proceeds no farther? that each of these poisons is not
attended by its own distinct results, not only as regardi?
the character of the sore, but also of the secondary and
constitutional symptoms ? Those, on the contrai'y, wh<v
hold the opinion that the whole train of venereal symp>
toms, both primary and secondary, are the product ol
the same poison, refer the diversities in the appearance
of the sore to the modifying influence of health, temper-
ament, and especially to the habits of the patient.

It is exceedingly probable, that, il these animal poi-
sons producing sypliilitic sores, be not all identically the
same, at least they are not very unlike, and may be
considered as the different genera of one speciea, owing
their differences cliiefly to the peculiarity of the consti-
tution in which they are engendered; for it is certain
that the poison of one sore in the female will not inva
riably give rise to a series of coiTespondiug sores i»
each of those individuals of oiu- own sex with who«
ilie may have Ijeen placed in contact.



BO



Venereal Dineanes.



I would here say that the sexvial diseases which de-
ra&ttited Europe about the period of the return of
Columbus from tlie discovery of America, are so altered
or Diodifled as to bear no relation to the horrible, yet
doubtlessly faithful relations of the historians of that
period. It was the opinion of Hunter that gonorrhoea
and chancre arose from tlie same S])cciflc virus, and hif»
practice was conformable and followed out (until the
days of Cline, Cooper, and Abernethy,) by the adminis-
tration of mercury, equally for the cure of both diseases;
but Hunter's authority is fast declining. The late Sir
Astley Cooper, in refersnce to this distinction, was
accustomed to observe, " Let me say no greater folly,
nor indeed cruelty, can be coD^mitted than that of
giving mercury to patients l;xborinf under gonorrhoea.
I abstain from entering the venereal yards of the other
hospital, because patients under gono'-rhcea are com-
pelled to midergo so inlamous a system of treatment."
Hunter spoke perhaps truly of a particuku' species of *
sore, but he geuerahzed too much, identifying the true
Chancre with eveiy other species of idcer resulting from
venereal intercourse; hence his conclusions are much
modified in modern practice. He taught us to beUeve
that it Li the invai'iable rule of all truly venereal sores
to becoaie progressively worse, and never undergo any
amendment, unless mercury, the specitic remedy, l^e
administered.

Thus chancres on the penis and secondary sotte throat
arc described as constantly growing worse without the
aid of mercury. Now the fact is, there arc many sores
wliich become kritable and disposed to slough under the
mercurial ti'eatmeut ; and iguoraut sui"geons, mistaldng



«



Venereal Diseases. SI

. the tnie nature of the case, have concUided that more
complete and speedy saturation of the system alone
could cure the mischiet tneir own remedies were actually
producing. If a sore were found to heal, as many will,
without merciu-y, then, according to the Hunteriau doc-
bines of the English school, it was declared not to have
been venereal; certainly, there is nothing in a name,
wliether ulceration or destruction of parts be styled vene-
real, syphilitic, or simple, if originating in sexual contact
Men do not, or ought not, prescribe for names, but for
an actually existing condition. In doubtful cases I am
advised to prefer the employment of mercury, for the
purpose of judg'-rg of the nature of the disease by the
foregoing criterion; but now it is M'ell known that
many rapidlj'-spreading dangerous sores, arising from
sexual intercourse, are not only curable without the
administration of a grain of mercurj', but are absolutely
rendered malignant by its ignorant and Injudicious
employment.

As the non-mercurial treatment of primary sores
gained ground, " secondary symptoms," (or more cor-
rectly spealdug, what were formerly mistaken as such,)
diminished at the same rate. Many of these miscalled
" secondary symptoms " have only lately been found out
hi many cases to be the primary symptoms of bad prac-
tice. Yes, the rotten skulls which are to be found in
ana'.omical museums, with all the other beautiful speci-
mens of diseased bones, wliich -in our younger days
were so abundant in hospitals, in the great majority ot
cases were the production of long and harrassing
com-ses of mercury. When the mercurial treatment
was most in vogue, secondary symptoms were mtwt



fiS



Venereal Diseases.



numerou-i, but the medical men of that day, the blind
de-votees of the doctrines of Hunter, supposed tliem to
be the result of too little mercury having been emiiluyed
In the primary treatment. These practitioners re-
sembled the celebrated Sangrada, who, when his patients
died, after he had drawn almost every drop of blood
from theu' bodies and drenched them with warm water
while they were able to swallow it, declared "their
deaths could not have happened if they had been suffi-
ciently bled or had talcen warm water enough." I
coincide entirely iu the spirit of the above passage fi'om
the published lectures of Dr. Dickson, formerly a medi-
cal officer on the British Staff, whose fearless mental
independence iu the exposure of popular and deeply
rooted medical faUacies is deserving of the highest
commendation.

The rash, indiscriminate, and unqualified abuse of
mercury has been productive of inlinite mischief, not
only iu tlie hands of professedly-educated surgeons and
ignorant quacte, but from tliem the practice has de-
scended to patients who have thought to cure thera-
selves. Under the notion of its being an antidote, the
untutored think they have only to satm-ate the system,
or to persevere in the use of some of the advei-tised
nostrums and pills, though professedly vegetable and
harmless, and so thousands arc mercurialized out of
existence, or their constitutions so bi'oken, and the fuuc-
(ions of the living system so imp;ui-ed, as to render the
residue of life miserable. It must be recollected that,
at best, the peculiar condition which mercury produces
upon the system, is in itself a diseased unnatural pre-
dicament For with respect to the principle on which



Venereal Diseases.



5S



nercury acts, we suppose it cures syphilis, not by any
-sliemical operation, but by exciting in the coustiLution
ami parts affected a particular action, to all intents and
purposes the efl'ects of a poison, yet not in dose tc
extiuguiah life; and that upon the prmciple or law oi
living organization, that no too-widely differing morliiflo
agencies can exist togetlier, the syphilitic action is ob-
literated and put out. No consideration, short of the
absolute impossibility of averting its use, should recon-
cile us to the evil. There certainly are c:ises where a
choice of evils present themselves, where mercury is
apparently indispensable; but the selection of these
lases, and the judicious administration of the remedy,
both as respects the form of the preparation, and its
dose, — these are matters which require the nicest dis-
eriniiuation. Mercurials are among the edge tools of
physic, and require to be wielded by a competent and
practised hand.

With what contempt and abhorence, then, ought
those charlatans to be viewed who recklessly tamper
with the health and very ILfe of the victims who are
unfortunately caught in their snares. Impelled by the
most sordid motives, they pursue their iniquitous career
utterly regardless of the misery and desolation wliich
must inevitably follow their vile and criminal practices.
With them to " poison is no murder," their scaixid hearts
l)eing deadened to all emotion except that of adding to
the proceeds of rapacious extortion. To further their
nefarious designs, they usher their deadly mixtures to
Buflerers, bearing the name of some illustrious practi-
tioner, thus committing tlieir deeds of darkness under
the apparent sanction of physicians who have long been



Venereal Diseases.



coiisi(lei-o<? as tlie benefactors of mankind. Wlien will
the rolgii cf ignorance and pi'csuinption ce:ise?

Tj ue svplillis is tliat disease in wliicli the cliancre or
primai y jtcer on tlie genitals has a hardened edge and
ba-sc; in n liich the blotches are scaly, with excavated
ulcers in llu! throat, or when affections of the bones are
comi)lained of.

As to the treatment of true syphilitic chancre, this, :is
I before mentioned, can be cured without mercury ; but
this does not warrant the assertion that mercury ought
not to be employed occasionally in some stages of the
disease; when judiciously administered in aggravated
cases, it sometimes expedites that process.

From the foregoing description it appears, then, that
venereal sores, or the sv. ollen condition of the glands of
the groin, termed bubo, may occm' without the general
system being at all contaminated; but when the poison
has been conveyed into the blood, unless proper reme-
dies be api)lied, another order of parts inevitably
becomes allected, namely, the skin, the tonsils, the nose,
thi'oat, inside of the mouth, and tongue. When absori>
tiou 01 me syphilitic vLi'us has taken place, ulceration
of the throat ia ihe earliest indication of the geuei-aJ
diseiisp, but the eruption of the skin is usually consid-
ered the first of the consututional symptoms ; this, when
truly syphilitic, is scaly, aUbrding an excellent guide in
tiie treatmunt; a circumstance by which it may be dis-
tinguished from those venereal eruptions which neithei
require nor bear mercury, which are either i)imp!i«,
pustules, or elevated tubercles. The mucous membrane
of the nose is liable '-«>, allected by this disetise as well
as the liniug membrane of the throat Ulceration in



PESTSCUTION OF THE NOSE BY SYPHILIS, AOT>
tlLOER ON THE CHEEK.



Venereal Diseases.



60



tliif. part very speedily affects the bones, which become
diseased, and are thrown off, the patient loshig tlie nat-
ural prominence of the nose, as well as the acuteness of
smell, and acquiring a most unpleasant peculiarity of
tone in speaking. The bones often separate long after
the syphilitic action has cetised ; and the treatment of
this variety of disease is similar to its management
when occumng in other parts of the body. Under
proper treatment, no person perhaps lost his nose from
syphilis ; but the instances are very numerous in which
this deformity has arisen from the abuse of mercury.
Affections of the bones in syphilis (or after the primary
symptoms have disappeared,) are often mistaken for
rheumatism. Pain in the bones is often the indication
of syphilitic action, after not merely the healing of
local sores, but even after idceration in the throat and
eruptive blotches upon the skin have entirely passed
away ; it would seem that there is an ■order of parts
mostly, but not always, attacked in succession, of which
the solid structure of the bones, as well as then- fibrous
investment, are usually the last to suffer.

A most important feature in the history of syphilitic
diseases, is the fact of their transmission fi-om parent to
oflspring. Infants may be affected with syphilis in
various ways. They may be diseased before birth in
C(;nsequence of the state of one or both of the parents.
Dr. Burns, in his work on " Midwifery," observes, " that
infection may happen when neither of the parents has,
at the time, any venereal swelling or ulceration, and
perhaps many years after a cure has been apparently
effected. I do not," he says, " pretend to explain here
the theory of syphilis, but conte.nt myself with relating



/



flO Venereal Diseases.

well-established facts." In such cases, it is very com-
mon for the mother to miscarry, or liave a premature
labor without evident cause ; fl'cqueiilly the infant born
before the time has been preceded by one or two dead
children. It may be clean, and apparently healthy,
and continue so during a month or two, but oftener it
is Jbeble and emaciated, having a wrinlded countenance,'
with the appearance of old age in miniature. Presently
the eyes are inflamed, its cry is huslcy, low, and mur-
muring; there is purident discliarge from the eyelids,
often, though not invariably, resulting from syphilitic
contamination ; copper-colored blotches, ending in ulcer-
ation, appear on the shrivelled skin; the nostrils
become stufied with a foetid discharge ; the voice be-
comes hoarse or wliistling, the thi oat becomes involved
in the ulcerative process, if indeed, as rare'.y happens,
tlie child lives long enough to arrive at that State. If
the unconscious helpless babe receives the infection from
its hired mn-se, we discover ulcers on her nipples, and
tlie disease appears on tlie child's mouth before the sur-
face of the body is allected — sometimes within twenty-
four hours after its entrance into the world. Such
children have the palms of the hands, the soles of the
feet, or the buttocks, covered with copper-colored erup-
tions, the nails at the same time beginning to peel ofl';
and, unless something be done for the little sufierers,
they will quickly be cari'ied oil' from the violence of the
disease, indeed, many children die of it in consequence
of the ti-ue nature of the complaint not being under-
Btood by the medical practitioner.

A case is recorded by Hunter, of a couple having
been mai-ried for twelve years, during which tune neither



Venereal Diseases.



61



party had been unfaithful to the other, nor were either
diseased; the husband had had syphilis two years pre-
viously to his marriage, but considered liinis(^lf cured.
About this time the lady bore him liei- fifth child; her
first two children were healthy, but the two following
were feeble and soon died ; the lady, also, was in poor
health; the last child was put out to nurse, and being
Itself afllicted with blotches, resembling venereal, and
having a sore mouth, the nurse became affected both
locally (on the nipples,) and constitutionally with a dis-
ease bearing every similitude to syphilis. Why this dis-
ease should lurk in the system for many years to devel-
ope its action on the child in the womb, or through
what agency this connection is produced, we hnow not
That the association does exist, it would be futile to
contradict; in fact, it frequently occurs that we can
trace in infants a regular continuity of the action of this
virulent poison from its parent. Once having entered
the system and identified itself with the circulating
fluids, it engendei-s a thousand fierce and contending
8y»f?)toms, which may be indefinitely postponed; but so
»ong as a germ remains in the constitution a hostile
actir.Q may be expected, and its ha^l-extinguished
energy again usurps its power, with gradiw-l and terrible
progress.

It is to be hoped that the foregoing outline of dis-
eases, arising from impure sexual contact, will be lound
BuIIiciently precise to demonstrate at once their com-
plexity and importance. Let not false delicacy induce
the suflerer to hazard the dangerous experiment of the
management of his own case. Without any know ledge
of the modiflcatious wliich individual temperament pro



62



Venereal Diseases.



duces on tlie character of disease — without an intimate
acquaintance with the nature of disease, rather thaa
with the mere liistory of sjnnptoms — ignorant of the
precise opei-ations of powerful remedies, for such a one
to turn those engines of good or of evil upon himself, is
a species of weakness truly pitiable.

Attempts at self-cui'e are too frequently finished in
self-destruction. It has been said, and not without
truth, that in the practice of law, " He who conducts
his own case has a fool for his client ; " find much more
emphatically may the assertion painfully apply to those
who turn, in weakness and suffering, then- ill-judged
remedies against themselves. The practitioners of the
healing art are generally wiser, and silently teach the
unprofessional world an important lesaon in refusing to
prescribe for themselves, however trivial or temporuy
may be their ftilmecta.



ON

NEEYOUS DEBILITY.

RESULTING FROM

SPERMATOPvRHGEA, ETC.

SECTION 1.

THE ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF THE UEINAET

AND GENERATIVE OKGANS.

In order fully to understand the nature and treatment
of the disorders resulting from the abuse of the repro-
ductive function, it will be necessary that the general
reader be informed of the exact position, form, structure,
and use of the various parts of the human body which
constitute what may be termed the "generative appara-
tus." These papei's, as before stated, being intended for
popular use, need only contain such a description of the
male organs as will render the further inquiry into the
Bubject clear and intelligible. The physiology of each
organ, so far as they are known, will be stated^ and af-
terwards their pathology ; for it is impossible to draw a
line of demarcation between the states of Health and
Disease, — they are so closely related that neither can
be studied with advantage, unless in connection with the
other. Equally close is the relation of Hygeine (or the
*rt of preserving the body in health,) to Therapeutic*



Generative and Unnary Organs.



(wMch is the art of curing dinease); and thus, in pro-
portion as our system of treatment loses its eniphica]
char!icter by being based on scientific principles, will it
increase in perfection and success.

The organs of the Generative system in man may be
divided into external and internal ; the former consisting
of the testicles and penis ; and the latter of the seminal
vessels, seminal bladders, and prostate [/lands. The
Urinary organs consist of the kidneys, ureters, bladder,
and urethra, all of which are internal except the urethra-
We will take the urinary organs first, commencing with
the kidneys.

The Kidneys {Benes) are two glands lying close upon
the muscles of the loins, behind and below the stomach,
resembling in form a French beau, and are called con-
glomerate glands. Their outer structure is coi lical or
glandular ; the inner, consisting of minute cells, forming
at first into small canals, and afterwards into tubes,
"^hich terminate and open into the ureters.

The Ureters are long membranous tubes or canals
rfhich connect the kidneys with the bladder, and convey
the urine, when secreted iu the former, to the latter.
There is one to each kidney ; sometimes (but rarely) two.

The Bladder (Vesica Urinaria) is a raembrAious and
muscular bag or pouch, situated in the middle of the pel-
vis or basin of the body below the abdomen, and is di-
vided into anterior, posterior, and lateral portions, llie
lower part of which is called Uie neck, terminating iu
the urethra or urinary canal, which is the common exit
of the urine from the body. The bladder is composed
of four coats or coverings, the external being the peri-
toneal (or serous) membrane; the next, the muscular :



Generative and Urinary Organs.

then the nervous (or cellular) ; and lastly the mucous
(or villous), which is the internal lining. All these or-
gans have their aileries, veins, nerves, and absorbents,
which serve for the purposes of nutrition, vitality, and
secretion.

We now arrive at the Generative Organs in man
— {and here, the reader's attention is particulai-ly re-
quested,) — commencing with —

The Testicles (Testes); two spermatic glands enclosed
in one peculiar bag termed the scrotum, divided inte-
riorly into two compartments, externally formed by a
common skin or integument, which, in the external
centre, forms a ridge, called the raphe, on each side,
and in the middle of this bag is a cell or cavity, in which
the gland of the testicle is situated. These glands are
composed of a vast number of flue tubes, folded in
various directions, and encased in a fibrous membrane
called the tunica albuginea, proper to each alone, and
again surrounded by one membrane common to both
testicles, called the tunica vaginalis ; over this there is
a muscular coat called the cremaster, and exterior to
that the cellular substance called the dartos, lying di-
rectly under the outer skin, which, in persons in health,
Is generally puckered or wrinkled. On the upper and
posterior portion of the gland of each testicle is situated
■"le epididymis, which is a network of vascular cella
consisting of minute seminal tubes, termidating in the
querent vessels, which are from twelve to thirty in num-
ber, and when spread out foiTn an united average length
of eight feet, each being rather more than seven inches
long. These vasa efferentia, or efferent vessels of the
^pi(lidymis, terminate in two ducts called



G'eneratlve and Urinary Organs.



Tlie Seminal Canals (Vasa Deferentia),yrh\ch agcend
ou each side lioin the upper poitioa of each testicle,
and aocompaiiy the spermatic artery, vein, aud serves,
which together form what is termed the upermaiic cord.
This cord passes upwai-ds tlirough the groin, and thence
laterally attached and across to the back and lower part
of the bladder, where it api)roaches its fellow aud termi-
nates in the seminal bladders, from each of which, re>
ceiving a branch, they emerge, and forming the ejacida-
tory ducts, open into the urethra, which they eater on
each side at the base of the prostate yland.

TJie Seminal Bladders (Vesiculce Seminales) are situ-
ated at the under part of the bladder, and are close to
each other except at their upper extremities. A mucous
membrane lines each of these bladders, wliich are con-
sidered to be the reservoirs for the secretion of the tes-
ticles, in the same relation as the urinary bladder is to
the kidneys.

The Prostate Gland is situated directly in front of the
eeminal bladders, aud surrounds the root of the m-ethra
Just at the neck of the bladder; it is a firm glandular
mass, in form resembling a carved chestnut.

The Penis (Memhrum Virile) is divided into the root,
the body, aud the glans or head ; the first attached to
the arch of the pelvis by the suspensory ligament, se-
cured on each side by three muscles, termed the erector
penis, transversalis perinoei, and transversalis perincei
alter ; these muscles a.ssist materially iu the functions
of the organ. Another muscle also, termed the acceler-
ator urincE, or ejaculator seminis, rising from the mem-
branous and terminating at the bulbous portion of the
9 vthra, is iu connection with these ; its name at once



Physiology of the Urinary Organs. 7

explaining its function. Tlie body of tlie penis is com-
posed of cavernous bodies, the vessels, nerves, and the
urethra. The upper surface of the penis is called
the dorsum, or corpus cavemosum, and extends from
the root to the ridge of the glans ; there is a groove
OP the upper side for the vessels and nerves, and one on
the lower, into vehich the urethra passes; and encasing
these parts is a firm elastic tissue, the continuation of
which forms the prepuce or foreskin, which covers tlie
glans or nut of the penis.

Tlie Urethra (or seminal and urinai-y canal) com-
mences from the neck of the bladder, passes through
the prostate gland, that portion of which is termed the
prostate portion of the urethra. Here the seminal
ducts open into it for the conveyance of the seed ; after-
wards passing under the bony arch of the pubes or
share bone, the urethra assumes the character of a
membranous pipe (membranous portion). The m-e-
thra then acquires a spongy and fibrous tissue, which
continues to surround it, when it expands into the top
or extremity of the whole, called the glans penis. The
urethra is a most delicate and important structure, and
its interior surface is lined with a very sensitive mucous
membrane, having several oblique ducts called lacuncB^
which furnish a secretion to prevent the abrasion of its
smface from acrid urine.

Lastly, the Glana, or head of the penis, protected by
the prepuce or foreskin, is abundantly filled with arter-
ies, veins, nerves, and al)sorbents, and invested with a
soft smooth outer skin, and endowed with peculiar sen-
sibility. This completes the popular anatomy of iJio
organs of generation, as lax ad it is here necessary to
explain it



Physiology of the Urinary Organs.



Havjig cursorily reviewed the anatomy, we uow u»
nve at the physiology, of the Urinary and Sexu&i
Organs ; the former of which, as subsidiary to the latter,
I shall but briefly mention. The kidneys are employed
for the purpose of secreting the urine from the blood,
which is conveyed to them by the emulgent arteries.
On the entrance of the artery into each kidney, it di-
vides into very minut# branches and ramifications, and
terminates in a capillary net-work, from which the se-
cretion of urine from the blood ensues. It is formed,
drop by drop, and passes out of the kidneys, through
the ureters, into the bladder; whence, after collecting
in a certain quantity, it is evacuated, and passing
through the urethra, is thus expelled from the body. In
addition to the benefit that the system derives from the
secretion of urine relieving it of a superfluous fluid, the
blood is evidently improved, and the whole system con-
siderably benefited by the withdi-awal of a certain
number of saline and deleterious substances which the
urine carries ofi" in solution, and which, according to
Berzelius, amount to fifteen. These generally exist in
the human urine, but the fluid occasionally contains,
in a morbid condition of the system, many other sub-
stances, as albumen, bile, sugar, fat, fibrin, blood, milk,
and purulent matter. In fact, there is scarcely any
other fluid in nature that contains so many substances
dissolved in it. The deleterious and heterogeneous
matters which the kulneys separate from the system
would erode the interior surfaces of the ureters and
bladder, but that these are provided with a villous coat
or lining, and plentifully supplied with a secretion or
•heathing mucus to obviate such an evil. When se-



Physiology of the Generative Or/jam. 69

creted, and most commonly when fii'st voided, the mine
haa a distinctly acid reaction in man, and in all car-
nivorous animals. On the contrary, in most herbiv-
orous animals the urine is alkaline and turbid; the
ditl'erence depending not on any peculiarity in the
mode of secretion, but on the differences in the food on
which the two classes subsist Human urine is not
usually rendered alkaline by vegetable diet, but becomes
BO after the use of alkaline medicines. The whole
quantity of urine secreted in twenty-four hours depends
greatly on the amount of fluid drunk, and the propor-
tion secreted by the sldn. The latter being more active
in summer than in winter, it may be estimated that in
summer a healthy man voids thirty ounces daily, and in
winter about forty ounces, thus giving a mean average
of thirty-five ounces of urinary secretion per diem.

In entering upon the physiology of the Generative
system, we shall first take the Glands of the Testicle, as
they stand in the same relation with the secretion of iha
semen or seed, as the kidneys do with the secretion of
urine; both, in fiict, being the organs in which those
important fluids are secreted or prepared. The sexual
functions commence at puberty, and are performed, if
the individual be in health, until the arrival of senes-
cence. The function is domant in infancy or childhoodj
and ceases in old age. The secretion of the seminal
, fluid takes place constantly (though slowly, except
under excitement,) in the tubuli semeniferi of the tes-
ticles. Thence it passes along the vasa deferentia into
the vesiculcE seminales, where it collects and is dis-
charged, pa.ssing thi'ough the prostate gland by dii'^U
into the urethra, whence it is expelled by emission.



Physiology of the Generative Organs.

To the vesiculoe seminales or seed-bladders a double
function may be assigned, for they secrete some fluid to
be added to that of the testicles, and sei-ve, also, as res-
ervoirs for tlie seminal fluid. The former is their most
constant, and probably most important, office, for in the
horse, bear, pig, and several other animals in whom the
vesiculiB seminales are large, they do not in any way
communicate with the vasa deferentia, but pour their
secretions separately into the urethra. It is highly
probable, however, that the secretion of the vesiculse
(the action of which is unknown,) contributes to the
proper composition of the impregnatory fluid. There
also exists some mystery respecting the secretions of
the prostate gland, their nature and purposes ; it is sup-
posed they contribute only a subordinate part in the
composition of the impregnating semen; for when
the testicles are lost, or their secretions destroyed,
though these organs are perfect, all procreative power
ceases.

The Semen is a thick whitish fluid, which consists o(
a liquor seminis, and of certain solid particles; is color-
less, transparent, and of an albuminous nature. It
contains, floating in it, various cells, oil-like globules,
minute granular matter, and two principal microscopic
constituents, named spermatozoa (spermatic filaments ),
and seminal granules. The spermatozoa are peculiar
living bodies,ex\st\ng in considerable numbers in healthy
semen, and in the xmnc of those whose generative sys-
tems have become debilitated: and when examined in
tne Held of the microscope, seem to be endowed with
the power of executing a brisk lashing movement.
Each consists of a flattened oval iiart or body, and of a



Physiology of the Oeno-ative Organs. Tl

long flliform taU ; the body is about one six-thonaandth
part of an inch in width, the entire body and tail being
about one four-hundredth to one flve-hundredtli part ol
au inch in length. The seminal granules are rounded
colorless bodies, averaging about one four-thousandth
part of an inch in diameter, and are allied to mucous
corpuscles. The seminal fluid, secreted by the testicles,
is one of those secretions in which a process of develop-
ment is continued after its formation by the secretory
cells and its discharge from them into the tubes. The
complete development of the spermatozoa, in tlieir fidl
proportion and number, is not achieved until the semen
has reached, and for some time lain in, the seminal blad-
ders (vesiculce). These spermatozoa present no trace
of structure or dissimilar organs ; they move about in
file seminal fluid, lashing their tails and propelling their
heads forward, in various lines. Their rate of motion
is about one inch in thirteen minutes. Of the physi-
ology of these seminal filaments, little that is certain
can be said ; their presence in the impregnating fluid of
nearly all classes of animals proves their essentiality to
the process of impregnation. They have been regarded
as highly organized, and as the materials or organs out
of which the new individual is begun; but whether
their contact with the ovum in the female be essential
to its impregnation cannot be determined ; it prolmbly
Is so, though the statements respecting the insertion of
part of the seminal filaments into the cavity of the
ovum have not been confirmed. Nothing has shown
what it is that makes the fluid capable of impregna-
tion, and of giving to the developing oflspring all the
characters, in features, size, mental disposition, and



Physiology of the Generative Oryana.



linbility to disease, which hehng to the father. This ia
a fact wholly inexplicable.

The ingenuity and research of philosophers have been
vainly, but not perhaps unprofitably, exerted in the at-
tempt to unravel the mysterious process of conception.
Life and organization are neither insparable, nor even
identical. After the investigation of ages, the reference
must be for explanation to the Creator of all things.
Man is still ignorant of how life begins or ceases. It is
all mystery to him. We see the instrument, and can,
perhaps, explain the structure ; but the hidden strings
that produce the harmony are past the scope of mortaJ



Generative Physioloffy.



SECTION n.

PUBERTY. — MANHOOD. — THE MORALE OF GKNKRA-
TrVE PHYSIOLOGY.

A PROFOUND and judicious observer of human nature
remarlced, " long, long ago." that matters very trivial,
either in present or future results, often occupy men's
interest and excite their vehement hopes and I'ears, to
the exclusion of considerations of infinitely greater
moment. A significant illustration of the truth of this
is contained in the fact that the most important phe-
nomena which occur in the progress of human beings,
from the cradle to the grave, — phenomena, on the
proper treatment of which depends the alternative of a
bug life of sound health and happiness, or a short one
of ill health and misery — are those concerning which
popular knowledge is most deficient; and which have,
by a deplorable misconception of the meaning and in-
tent of moral precepts, been all but ignored by many
of our modern physiologists.

This total neglect is of no recent date ; indeed, within
the last twenty years it has been in some measure rem-
edied by the self-sacrificing devotion with which certain
men of learning, benevolence, and distinguished profes-
sional attainments, disregarding the whisperings of
sordid self-interest and of puerile false delicacy, have
applied themselves to the work of extricating, from tho
dense cloud of ignorance in wliich ages of barbarous



4



OeneratAve Physiology.



prejudices had enveloped it, — the most momentous,
most interestiug, and at the same time most intricate
brancli of pathological inquiry. Wlien our fathers were
young men, and for a century preceding, this all-import-
ant subject was absolutely consigned by the medical
profession to the hands of as crafty, as cruel, as ignorant,
and nnscrupulous a class of impostors as ever preyed
upon credulity and helpless suffering. Things are now
somewhat better in this respect. The topic is not
wholly a tabooed one, and a few of the most illustrious
men of whom science and erudition can boast, have
labored successfully in the elucidation of the great fun-
damental laws of human life jind death. My own
highest pride — my abounding and unfailing source of
mental comfort and satislaction, is the consciousness
that to the stock of knowledge collected by these great
men, my personal investigations, my opportunities of
observation .and comparison, my prolonged studies and
experience, have enabled me to make additions, and
have produced practical results and discoveries, which*
in the course of my practice, have relieved an enorn>
ous mass of human wretchedness, and often substituted
health and hope for utter prostration and despair.

Whilst, however, the relief of misfortune is dear to
philanthropy, an object paramount even to this is to
preclude the access of misfortune ; and in no way can
this be more effectually accomplished than by the in-
culcation of such knowledge as may enable persons in
all spheres to discern the road to happiness and to pur-
sue it. Such is the special and single object of the
present ■ volume.

Much has been said, and still more written, concerr.!ii«



Generative Physiology.



75



what Is asuiilly called the " turn of life." viz. : thc! period
at wliich human vigor begins to descend towards the
weakness of old age. But, unfortunately, too little
attention — virtually none, until comparatively lately
— has been paid to that which constitutes the great
"turn," the great change of all, namely that point in
our existence when the transition from incompleteness
to completeness takes place — the period when the
GRAND RESULT, for whlch Nature had been preparing
during all the earlier years of man's life, at length, by a
spontaneous effort of the mysterious principles of vi-
tality, attains development; and when faculties long
lying dormant, and in the creation of which the unerring
precision of All-seeing Wisdom has been most won-
drously displayed, become instinctively conscious of the
uses for which they are designed.

The term in man's existence when this great marldng
epoch occurs, is known by the generic appellation of
"puberty." The age at which.it sets in varies consid-
erably, according to differences in individual tempera-
ment and in climate ; but it may be stated as a general
fact, that except in very warm tropical countries, the
earliest age is ten, the latest twenty. As in females
the procreative powers cease long before those of the
male, so their commencement takes place sooner. Thus
in our northern climate the age of puberty is usually
fiom eleven to fourteen in girls ; from twelve to fifteen
in boys. In Italy, Spain, and the southern countries of
Europe, the period is at least one year earlier; and ia
Africa, India, and some regions of America, it is not
very unusual to find girls capable of child-bearing whose
years scarcely number nine. The "slaveholders" of



Relations between the Sexes.



Brazil, tlie United States, &c., very often derive sonw
of their ill-gotteu gains from the sale of a mother and
child between whose ages the difl'erence is scarcely ten
years.

On the other hand, there are instances in which
young persons of lymphatic constitutionB, whose physir
cal training has been neglected, approach fioent?/, before
the natural capacities of manhood and womanhood are
developed. The hastening or the retarding of such
development, in either sex, sometimes arises from various
prejudicial causes, which are duly treated in the course
of this work.

A distinguished writer on this subject aptly describes
puberty to be the period at which the generative func-
tion commences. The function, he observes, " is dor-
mant in infancy and childhood, and ceases in old age."
Bj' far the most critical and important stage of human
life is that at which it first becomes active, and this
stage is accordingly marked and pre-announccd by a
number of symptoms, indicative of the arrival of what
may be appropriately described as a new state of being.

As the body and mind have a close and ineradicable
sympathy with each other, these symptoms are discern-
ible, not only in the physical, but in the mental organi-
zation. At the time when a youth receives from nature
the useful admonition, the meaning of which is so often
withheld ft-om him by a cruel and baneful prejudice, a
number of new sensations arise to which he has been
hitherto a stranger. The extreme restlessness and
exuberant elasticity of childhood give way to a staid
gravity, almost approachihg melancholy, and ft"om which
misjudging friendship sometimes endeavors to rally him



Belatim^ bettoeen the Sexes. Ti

by ridicule and satire. The gait becomes settled, the
voice changes from the shi-iUness of childhood to the
more diguifled fullness and depth of adolescence; a rea-
sonable and reasoning anxiety for knowledge takes the
place of the random cmiosity and troublesome garrulity
of the " little boy." Tlie manifestations and demeanor
towai'ds the other sex vary infinitely. In boys of timid
and delicate constitutions, whose chief association has
hitherto been with females, there arises an almost un-
conquerable bashfulness when in the presence of those
to whom they had been most accustomed. This bash-
fulness is produced by the powerful emotion whose
very strength, in the absence of the knowledge how to
express itself, sometimes leads to a morose deportment
towards — even to an avoidance of the society of — the
gentler sex; a circumstance which, by an egregious
eiTor, is ascribed to the poor youth having imbibed a
dislike to females. How totally contraiy is the real state
of the case ! In boys of opposite and more robust con-
stitutions, who have associated with their own sex in
atliletic spoils and pastimes, the indications are different.
They become more attached to the society of the other
sex, towards whom their carriage is that of frank and
gallant homage. Far from being impelled to liide their
feelings, or resort even to the affectation of dislilve for
those towards whom their instincts yearn, they take
plejisure in the manifestation of the delightful feelings
which they regard as manly and ennobling, and are
never so happy as when engaged in those .attentions
that indicatxi devotion and afl'ection.

In botli c^ses. liowtivcr. whether of bashfulness or
boldness, the physical and mental powers in all parts of



Sexual Development.



the organization are clianged. It very often happens
that, uniuediately before the access of puberty, Nature,
as if to bestow all her efforts on the development and
core.pletion of the great functional revolution, permits a
temporary diminution of the force and vitality of the
other faculties. Languor, weakness, sickness, awkward-
ness of motion, partial stupidity, aie not imiiequeutly
observable. But, the revolution once accomplished, this
disarrangement passes away, and Nature, left fi-ee to the
exertion of her influence over the general system, causes
a liealthful reaction, in wliich all the other- powers are
invigorated in proportion to the efficiency of " the new
sense." Then comes a " settling " and stiengthening of
the general constitution. The bones and muscles be-
come flimer and hai-der; the joints and sinews somewhat
less pUant, but more endui'ing and reliable; the chest
and respiratory organs more capacious ; and it sometimes
happens that a childliood, precarious and deUcate, and
afllicted by various infantUe maladies, merges into a
youthhood of great robustness, fi-ee from disorders of
any kind.* The mind, as I have befoi-e observed, par-
takes powerfully of tliis sudden spring ; and the youth
is prepai-ed for tlie profitable study of subjects hitherto
incomprehensible to liim. The late Dr. Eyan, than whom
no modern physiologist deserves greater reverence frora
posterity for the substantial services which his labors
have confeired on all mankind, gives, in his Latin trea-

* Note.— It should be here observed, that, though juve lile
dJsurdcrs ofteu disappear at puberty, new disorders, before un-
biiowD, someti»<:c« date from this critical period of life. Muoh
ipenda in this i^pect on Uie lutciligeiicc ot i<areiiiB, guardiaiia,
ttd ■3fleJ-i«.



Sexual Development.



79



tise. Be Genere Humano ejusque Varietatihus, an
adinii'iible epitome of the overt signs uf puberty, a trans-
lalion of wliich passage may prove useful and acceptable :
"At this age a sudden increase of the whole body takes
place, sometimes iu a wonderful manner ; the voice be-
comes hoarser in males; the pubes, axillie, face, and
whole body become covered with a wliitish down. The
genital organs, wliich were previously small and useless,
increase with the rest of the body, and being much aug-
mented, secrete a prolific semeu, by whose stimulus the
youtli is incited to the enjoyment of the gifts of Venus.
About the same age at which boys become puberous,
girls become nubile; the genital organs are evolved, the
pubes appear, and the breasts aie developed ; a new love-
liness appears on the countenance ; a new elegance of
the whole figure; and if the individual be previously
delicate, good health is suddenly enjoyed. Hence, by
the laws of nature, the sexes are impelled with a de-
sh-e to be united, whence oifspring similar to tliemselves
are propagated.", liousel, in his Systeme Physique et
Morale, aUuduig to the functional derangements which
so often occm- at this period, asserts, " that by the elabo-
ration of the reproductive fluids, there residts a super-
abundance of liie, wliich endeavors to communicate and
establish itself — there Is a new and mysterious want
developed, which compels the sexes to approach each
other." And Colonis, in his Eapport du Physique et
Morale de Vllomme, alluding to the conllicting mental
emotions which arise, supposes that " the n -.w want pro-
duces in the young man a mixtme of audacity and tim-
idity ; of audacity, because he knows that all his or^riuw
are endowed with unwonted vigor ; of timidity, because



Sexual DevelopmoiL



Uie nature of his desues astonishes liiin, as deliance to
them disconcerts hiui. In the young gul tliis want gives
rise to a sentiment of modesty, or virgin ehame, of vvliich
bhe was heretofore ignorant, wliich may be regarded as
the Iiidden expression of her desires, or tlie involuntary
signs of lier seci'et impressions." To these observations
I would add the remark, that at this critical and inter-
esting period the reproductive fluid deposited as it is in
its proper receptacles, and thence natuj-ally secreted and
partly dispersed throughout the body, whilst it excites
and invigorates the sexual organs, produces a corres-
pondhig excitement and vigor in other pai-ts of the
system. But it is important to uiform the reader that I
am here supposing a case in which the healthful com-se
of natm-e had not been interlercd with or set aside by
vitiating influences. Too frequently it happens that
through circumstances which exist more or less in all
states of artificial society, the gifts of Providence are so
perverted that that which was intended for man's happi-
ness, health, and longevity, becomes the insti'ument of
his wretchedness and premature death.

Much ingenious speculation might be uselessly ex-
pended in discussing abstract questions relative to the
ultimate law of the mechanical combuiations through
which the sexual emotion, terminating in the generative
orgasm, is produced. The present being a work of in-
structive fact, and not of vague conjectm-e, I will merely
remark, that it is abundantly certain that the emotion
may originate eitlier exclusively in the sexual organs
themselves, or (thi'ough the sympathetic relations exist-
ing between diUerent i)arts of the body,) in iir.i'i-essions
couveyed externally or internally to other or}.;ans. lu



Sexual Development. 81



man, tliere Is no doubt, such impressions are usually
conveyed tluough the bram, through contact or vision ; *
tlie organs of smellmg and hearing exercise similar influ-
ence uix)n many of the lower animals. The natunjt
process which is the result of the emotion is regarded,
and no doubt justly, as more intensely absorbing and
exciting than any other — so much so, indeed, that num&
rous civses are on record in which the excitement haa
proved too strong for the vital energies, and death has
occurred in the consummation of the very act by which
life is intended to be perpetuated and reproduced.

No object of juvenile education should be more atten-
tively studied by judicious and affectionate parents, thau
that of taldng every measure to guai'd against the
calamity of the era of puberty arriving, under circum-
stances which could impede or vitiate the process of
healthy development. Such circumstances are of vari-
ous kinds. Luxurious and higlily-seasoned food, over-
much study, close apartments, ill-ventilated bed-rooms,
tlie neglect of strict and regular cleanliness as regai'ds
the most delicate parts of the organization, are among
the causes which may produce the precocious and pre-
mature growth of sensations, the postponement of which
would be profoundly conducive to the welfare of the
individual. But independent of these causes, and even
of that most dreadful and extensive agent of woe, paui,
and death, to which detailed allusion is made in other
chapt"m, evil often arises from unsuspected peculiarities
of conformation, which the pernicious habit of ignoring



*Rat also by other causes — viz., occupations, the use of pai^
Meal/*' food, chaugcsiu atmosplicric tompuralurc, &c., &o.



True Morality.



this subject prevents parents from even dreaming oC
Cases coiild pointed to, in wliicli at an age scarcely
emerging from infancy, it has been found necessary to
adopt coercive measm-es, even with femiilo. cliildren, in
order to prevent fearful results arising from tendencies
and inclinations incidental to a peculiar state of certain
organs. Still more often vrith boys ; and tlie mstances
to wliich I am here more especially referring, are those
in which there had been no depravation fl-om com-
panionship with others. To mere neglect, or rather
ignorance, on the part of their seniors, the poor little
victims owed the supen'ention of circumstances li-aught
with then- future misery. And here I would earnestly
impress on parents and all others who have the care of
yoimg persons, tliat there is nothing which more imper-
atively requires constant solicitude and w.atchfuluess,
than the part of the system which the frightful errors of
other times left wholly to the chapter of accidents. In
neglect of this resides the fruitful cause of the UTetilev-
able calamity and ruin of millions.

The most prolific source of all evil, however, — that
which slays its thousands whilst the others slay their
tens, — is the destructive habit most fi-equently con-
tracted through the unwatched association of young
p(!0ple, though occasionally thi-ough the solitary and
accidental discovery of a fatal secret. And in this place
I woiild solemnly and emphatically protest against that
other most pernicious eiTor, which causes the secret in
question to be a secret at all. AVhen the time arrives
for the development of certam faculties, it is a mousti-oua
delusion to imagine that mere silence on the part ot
adult friends can extmguish these faculties, or suppresi'



True Morality. 83

tliese Instincts, or prevent tlie youth from feeling the
Boiisations to which they give rise. The rigorous i)rolii-
bition of all allusion to the subject, the absence of even
the most shadowy suggestive intimation, as to the mis-
chief and miserj' to which abuse or too early indulgence
gives rise, is mainly accountable for the wide-spread
existence of that devastating vice, wliich has sent, for
centuries, and stiU sends its myriads of iniserables to
early and ignominious graves, and has wrought the
ruin and extinction of many a noble race.

Against this murderous hypocrisy — the most blind,
mistaken, the most obstinate and wrong-headed of all
species of conventional hypocrisies — I would raise my
warning voice, sadly and solemnly. My conscientious
persuasion, founded on experience of an uninterrupted
magnitude, — such as probably never before fell to the lot
of any man, is, that the prejudice in question has immo-
lated more victims than war, famine, and pestilence
put together; and it will not be from any want of exer-
tion on my part, if, unfortunately for my fellow-beings,
I descend to the tomb without having eradicated it from
the list of " social proprieties."

Ti"ue morality, sound morality, the morality which
will produce its goodly fruit in generations of virtuous,
healthful, long-lived, happy, and really " innocent" men
and women, consists, not in attempting fradulently to
conceal the sacred laws of Nature, and to close up her
book, so pregnant with truth and wisdom, — true moral-
ity, I repeat, does not consist in this brutish sacrifice to
the demon of ignorance, but rather in iastructing tha
rising youth in the great and noble objects for which his
capacities cf mind and body were bestowed upon him;



Natural Period of Development.

til making him distinctly aware of the certahi, the inev-
itable misery involved in the abuse of those capacities,
and the equally certain happiness arising from patience,
moderation, and the avoidance of disiistrous imprudence.
The years allotted to the progress from hifancy to
puberty are years which Nature devotes to the prepara-
Jdon of the body for a mighty crisis ; the wise and virtu-
ous vigilance of pai'ents and teachers, should be equally
assiduous in preparing the mind for the same.

Thus much I have felt bound to say in emphatic pro-
test against the continuance of a barbarous and destruc-
tive error in the existing system of juvenile education;
and I feel the more justified in saying it, because my
professional pursuits have necessarily procured me more
knowledge than can possilily be possessed by any other
of my medical brethren, of the mischiefs which have
flowed fi-om want of candor and truth on this grave
topic.

For the rest, it would be possible, apropos of the sub-
ject matter of this chapter, to enter into many interest-
ing details concerning what may be denominated the
Curiosities of Physiology, but I prefer confining myself
as much as possible to that which is most calculated to
be practically useful, and avoiding any digression which
could divert attention from my main object — that of
caution, warning, and explanation. The opinions of
eminent men, as to the period of life at which, in the
northern and temperate latitudes, sexual intercourse
may be indulged in, witliout detrimental effects, seem
to fix the age of twenty for the male, and of eighteen
for the female, as the earliest. Some constitutions
requhe a much longer postponement of amatory iuduJ-



Natural Period of Developmmt. 85

gence. It ia an ascertained fact, however, that the
earlier the indulgence the sooner does the power of
procreation decay. Women, in general, are incapable
of cliildbearing after forty-five, and the generative func-
tion usually ceases in males at sixty or sixty-five. It
often happens that sexual vigor does not last nearly so
long ; whilst, on the other hand, there are a few well
authenticated cases of children being borne by women
who have almost reached^ their sixtieth yeai-, and of
patriarchs of eighty, or even a hundred, becoming
parents. Such instances must be regarded as freaks ol
Nature in her eccentric moods. Precocious and un-
healthy development is hastened by meretricious con-
versation, lascivious pictures, and by perusal of the
obscene and exciting books, the composition of which
constitutes the trade of a class of wretches who live by
pandering to vice and licentiousness, and who deserve
the heaviest reprobation and punishment accorded to
infamous crime. The aahiect of Sexual Physiology is
one of the most grave and solemn which can occupy
the contemplation of man, and in that tone it should be
treated. Next to the evil of concealment and mystifi-
cation respecting its great truths, is that of alluding to
those truths in a spiiit, partaking even remotely, of lev-
ity. Of all the people of Greece, the Spartans were
those amongst whom there was the greatest candor,
the greatest gravity, the greatest plainness, the least ot
either hypocrisy or levity, upon matters relating to the
intercourse between the sexes ; and of all the people ol
Greece, the Spartans were the most vigorous, the most
Uimperate, and the most chaste.
Always beaiing in mind that not only too early, but



80



Empiricism.



too frequent and indiscriminate intercourse, is the cer-
tain forerunner of premature decrepitude and death, Id
congequence of the loss of the whole of a nourishmg
and invigorating essence, much of which was intended
by nature to be retained in the system as the most
ellectual sustaiuer of its strength, and the most effectual
counterpoise to the wear and tear of time ; let modera-
tion in the enjoyment of tiie liigliest physical pleasure
be the motto of the married as well as of the single.
The most powerfiU and healthy body with which man
was ever blessed, could not sustaiu, without permanent
damage, more than a very prudent and well-regulated
amount of intercourse ; and it will be well to reflect
that any departure from prudence, even during the
earlier enjoyments of nuptial love, may not only lay the
foundation of disease and infirmity in the parent, but
devolve, pain, sickness, deformity, and short life on the
offspring, as the penalty of such imprudeut abandon-
ment to mere passion.

By faithfid attention to the facts and counsel con-
tained in these chapters, intelligent and conscientious
guardians of inexperienced youth may avert from their
charges some of the direst curses and most degrading
miseiies by which fallen human nature can be afflicted.
It 18 a subject upon which, beyond all othei'S', ignorance,
orejudice, and negligence, produce the most terrible
effects ; and to the removal of these initiative causes of
ill (fontes et origines mali), and of the traui of calami-
ties flo>Yiug from them, I have devoted the labor of a
long, acti>e, and (within the scope of my own exertions)
signally sucoessful professional career. Besides the
main evils themselves. 1 have had collateral difficulties



Empiricism.



to contend with; one of tliese being the apathy and In'
dolence of too many of my brother pliysicians, who, by
applying only a small portion of thou- time and inquiries
to a subject, whose complexity requires the undivided
attention of skilful and qualified men, have practically
disqualified themselves from efficiently dealing with it;
tlie other collateral difficulty being the scandal and dis-
trust created by the proceedings of a host of knavish
and sordid persons, who, without possessing any one
requisite of education, experience, or intelligence, have
taken advantage of professional apathy, and, under a
variety of assumed and quiisi-foreigu nomenclatures, set
up as practitioners in a pursuit of the principles of
which they are as ignorant as are those who unliappily
commit themselves to their treatment. To such a pitch
of effl-ontei"y have persons of the class named carried
their proceedings, that they have even printed and para-
phrased, in various ways, some of my published works,
Interlarding them (in order to evade leg.al penalties,)
with irrelevant matter, in which the most dangerous
and audacious fallacies are set forth. This sad state of
tilings is indeed to be deplored ; but it is only to be put
down by men of character and reputation coming for-
ward frankly and fearlessly to warn, to instruct, to heal.
My most gratifying recollection, tlie higli and ample re-
ward of much bodily and intellectual toil, much sacrifice
of wealth and ease, is, that — as testified by tlie thank-
ful declarations of thousands who have been rescued
fi'om anguish and despair — I have worked efficiently
for the accomplishment of this holy and beneficent pur-
pose I



88 Physiology of Marriojge. •



SECTION HL

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF MABEIAQE.

Ttth mo3t venerable philosophers, the most exalted
I'lirifluaij philanthropists and theologians of all ages,
have concurred in proclainung the incontrovei-tible
axiom, tha>, the moral, social, and eternal interests of
man are uitiiuately bound up with the due guai'diansliip
of his physical well-being. This is a truth, pregnant
with meaning^l momentous signiflcance, the neglect ol
which, in one of iia most important phases, has been the
cause of a larger amount of human misery than, per-
haps, any other of tlm calamitous "mistakes" whicb
originated in the ignorance of bygone ages.

Now, of all the subjects which bear directly on th<»
perfection or disanangement of the bodily functions —
on the absence or presence of disease, acute and chronic
— on the vigorous development of the faculties which
produce physical as well as intellectual healUi — none is
more interesting, none more important, none more com-
plicated in its details, none requiring a more perfect
combination of skill, delicacy, boldness, and caution, in
those who undertake to give advice upon it, than that
which deals with the moral and social relations of mar-
riage, \rith the causes wliich produce wedded happiness
or its reverse; and, still more especially, witli those
remote and too frequently unsuspected habits and cir-



Physiology of Marriage,



89



cumstances, dating sometimes fi'om the eai'liest period
of youtli, and by slow, but certain and inevitable steps,
paving the way for the most excruciating woe and the
deepest degradation wliich man is capable of eudm-iog.

In short, to use the language of a distingiushed mciU-
cal authority of our own age,* the subject, " considered
in all its relations — religious, moral, social, legal, physi
cal, philosophical, and medical — will be found of the
greatest importance to mankind. . . . The function
of reproduction has been exaimned and inquii'ed intc
by the most vutuous theologians, naturalists, philoso-
phei-s, physiologists, legislators, and jurisconsidts, as the
most influential of all the functions of the human
economy on every class of society, both civilized and
savage."

It was appositely remarked by the great literary colos-
sus of the last centm-y,t that, "if marriage has many
cares, ceUbacy has no blessmgs." FeaifuUy momentous,
however, to each individual is the contingency whether
or not the "blessings," properly appertaming to the conju-
gal state shall be secured by the solemn contract entered
into; for if the result be in the negative he has but too
surely tied himself down to a dhe and hopeless bondage.
The nuptial union, in short, stands alone as the one
great act, which, beyond any other, and indeed beyond
all others together, is destined to tinge with hues of sor-
row or of joy each future step of our journey through
life. It is emphatically the most important relation that
we can form, from the cradle to the grave, and indepen-
dently of our own individual happiness, the thought



Tb« late Valentine Mutt, M. D. \ Dr. Johnson.



90 Aptitude and Inaptitude



tliat the happiness of oMieis is decisively and forevei
allccted by tlie wisdom oi folly of oitr choice, ought to
be forcibly impressed upon the recollection of young
persons.

But here it is necessary to pass to another considera-
tion deeply concerning the comfort, the peace, and hai>
piness of thousands of wedded pairs. Much wretched
uess is fi-equeutly caused by a fear on the part of marriea
persons, that the impediments whicli balfle enjoyment
and baulk expectiition, are absolutely insusceptible ol
relief — absolutely incurable — when, in reality, the. state
of things is by no means so despet-ate as this. The al-
leviation of actual evils, the removal of distressing fears
and unfounded suspicions, the communication and reali-
zation of rational and invigorating hope, are often, in
cases apparently the most cheerless, witliin the power ol
the intelligent and educated physiologist; and to any
who are already beginning to deplore what they con-
ceive to be their unfortunate predicament, I would say,
decide not hurriedly against yourselves or the partner ol
your bed ; ascertain whether it be no mere temporary
cause (of which, as fortunately proved by the triumplis
of medical science, there are many,) that forms tlie ob-
Btruction, the apparently insmmountable barrier, to
your natural and commendable wishes.

Much mismiderstanding, many keen heartburnings,
that destroy the comfort of married life, would be en-
tirely removed, if upon the hearts and consciences of
mankind were impressed a more correct knowledge ol
the indispensible requisites for a happy marriage, for the
power oi communicating as well svs of seltishly receioidfir
pleasure from that union, intended for the reciprocal



For Wedded Happiness.



91



accomplishineut of these objects. On a due understand-
ing, aud 11 faithful discharge of these duties, the hapi)i-
ness of each mdividual, and the well-being of unborn
generations, greatly depend.

Unhappy marriages! Unfortunate matches! Wliat
a melancholly retrospect of sin and sorrow do these sim-
ple words present to the contemplation of the very few
qualified meilical practitioners, who have in modern
times made cause and consequence in tliis branch o/
physiological investigation, the pecnliai" subject of their
studies ! What tremendous secrets of guilt, caused by
parental neglect — what feaifid records of error, never
discovered or revealed until too late for remedy — what
awful monuments of the curses which imprudence and
wickedness, arising mainly in ignorance, inflict on the
whole race of man ! There is no branch of science
which discloses to the experienced investigator secrets
more fruitfully illustrative of the feebleness, and at the
same time the obstinacy, of unreclaimed, unguarded,
unguided human nature.

Allusion may, in this place, be usefully made to early
marriages, and to those which ordinary parlance terms
" love-matches," closely connected as they are with the
general subject under consideration. It cannot be
doubted that, whilst warm and mutual affection is an
essential condition to married fehcity, mistakes, as to
the reality and leciprocity of this sentiment, are active
and deplorable accessories to permanent misery. Nevei
was so false and treacherous a guide as passion, when not
foimded on well-merited and well-defined respect; never
was there a feeling which more certauily and speedily
relapses into weariness, ending in antipathy and ultimate



92



The Pervermon



hatred ; never was there a position so deeply to Ije pitied
Uian that of a married couple who llnd theiaselvea
chained down, by one fatal mistake, in the woful thral-
dom of " an ill-iissorted alliance." No matter from what
source the discontent arises, if that discontent is inca-
pable of being removed, it degenerates into disgust, as
surely as cause leads to sequence in the natural proces-
sion of things ; and the unibrtunate, ill-mated pair And
each in the other the provocative and pi'omoter of an
unconquerable dislike which neither has the power to
overcome.

But whilst such sources of discontent are more nu-
merous and peculiar in their origin than is even sus-
pected by the sufferers themselves, still less are they
suspected by thousands of parents, guardians, teachers,
and others, on whom devolves a great responsibility for
neglecting precautions and inquuies much more impor-
tant, in regard to the future happiness of those com-
mitted to their care, than any consideration of pecuniary
aggrandisement. II" it be true that parental interference,
founded on avarice and ambition, have occasionally con-
signed young people to lives of wretchedness, it is
equally so that the absence of interference, the neglect
of considerations requiring the most close, cautious, and
delicate supervision and attention, have led to misfor-
tunes a thousand-fold greater in number and extent.

To come to particulars, there is no danger which re-
quires more caution and vigilance, in order to guard
effectually against its results, than that involved in fclie
formation of bad labits, often contracted at schools, but
sometimes even under the privacy of the parental roof,
by which habits, and by the excesses connected with



Of Marriage.



93



Ihem, myriads of naturally good constitutions are un-
derinlned forever.

Full of wisd jm and humanity are the words of a vene-
T^ble prelate, who alludes to this part of the subject iu
the following forcible language : —

"I cannot understand why an evil everywhere ac-
knowledged and felt, is not remedied somewhere, or
discussed by some one with a view to a remedy. But
no ; it is like putting one's hand into the fire only to
touch upon it ; it is the universal bruise, the putrefying
sore, on which you must not lay your finger ; or your
patient (that is, society) cries out and resists, and, lilte
a sick baby, scratches and kicks its physician. Strange,
and passing strange, that the relation between the two
sexes, the passion of love, in short, should not be taken
into deeper consideration by our teachers and our legis-
lators. People educate and legislate as if there was no
such thing in the world ; but ask the priest, ask the
physician — let these reveal the amount of moral and
physical results from this one cause."

It was for the purpose of assisting to remedy the fu-
nereal evil indicated in this passage, that I commenced,
many years since, a course of study and investigation,
which, so far as my labors have proceeded, have pro-
duced an amount of good, fer transcending any expect-
ations which I could have formed at the outset. As has
l)een truly observed by an eminent writer already
quoted, the subject had received the notice of some of
the best, wisest, and ablest men who ever lived; but
their efforts were for the most part confined to lament-
ing the latal infatuation, which had prevented educated
medical men from devoting to the topic at issue that



94 The Perversion



undivided attention wliich its intricacy, its dilUculty? it«
importance, and the vast scope and variety of the lielda
of contemplation from which it should be viewed, abso-
lutely require. They exclaimed against the neglect, but
the neglect still continued, and daily hecatombs of hu-
man lives fell victims to it. A deadly evil was acknowl-
edged, — an evil constantly manil'esting iteelf in divorces,
in suicides, in horrible and revolting forms of disease, io
graves opening for the reception of persons of botli
sexes who had not attained ripe age; but practically,
this state of things was too long ignored — was treated
as if it had no existence — was scarcely heard of, save
in the indignant protests of the illustrious men to whom
reference has just been made.

In the history of human civilization, if there be one
featm'e more brilliant and gladdening than the rest, it is
to be found in that civU and wholesome restraint upon
brute passion which exists in marriage ; without which
society would consist of one continued struggle for the
momentary gratification of individuals. It may be re-
garded as the basis of social prosperity, as tliat which
gives us the sanction of legal right to the object of our
most intense solicitude.

Conjugal society has been defined as a perpetual
compact between man and woman, to live together in
mutual love and friendship, for the procreation, conserv-
ation, and education of children, and to aid each other
by mutual succor through the course of life. "The
diversity of the sexes was instituted for this purpose;
anil there is an lunate desire implanted in both to per-
petuate theu- species, their name, and to transfer their
property to their childien. Marriage was msftuted by



Of Marriage.



»5



the Dhonu Greater in the time of man's primitive inno-
cence, as the means of his happiness and the perpetu-
ation of his race." Its influence extends fi-om individu-
als to liingdoms, and to the whole world. Jeremy
Taylor calls it " The mother of the world, which pre-
sei-ves cities, and fills cities, churches, and even heaven
itself." It is the primitive source of morals and society,
the nurse of viitue and patriotism, the stay and support
of governments. To the statesman, the divine, and the
physician, the considerations which it presents are all-
important. No other social institution exercises so wide
and profound an influence upon the well-being of states
and communities, inasmuch as bodies politic are com-
posed of a number of individual families, the total form-
ing the aggregate results of conjugal unions ; and the
health, strength, and intellectual and physical vigor of
the citizens, (all depending so mainly upon the nature
nnd observance of the laws relating to this great ordi-
nance,) form the best and only trustworthy support oi
national glory, greatness, and prosperity.

Whilst recognising the wisdom of the arrangement
which renders the marriage-tie permanent, it is right to
remember that that vei-y permanence produces a proba-
bility tliat if the contract be entered on unadvisedly, or
should its obUgations be undischarged, results the most
appalling and disastrous must ensue.

How often, even in the narrow circle in wiiich private
individuals move, may they note a legal union in which
each party has assumed more or less disguise or dissim-
ulation towards the other; and the fact has only been
made apparent when frank sincerity Is too latfi to sever
.he indiasolublc let'.er, which until death, must buid two



06



Tlie Perversion



pect/le secretly disgusted with tliemselves for their du«
plicity, and with each other for the absence of all that
can endear a married home. And if, within the naiTow
sphere of private observation, the fact occurs frequently,
how much of similar misery must exist in the great
world around us I How many apparently smiling
strange faces painfully conceal the canker worm secretly
consuming all that once was hopeful within. Fortune
may have smiled upon one or both, the respective fami-
lies and Mends of husband and wife may hope for their
mutual happiness, and tiu"n an unwilling ear to the
faintest suspicion that all is not secretly well with them ;
all which the world can know may seemingly be there,
to constitute the requisite ingredients in the cup of
earthly enjoyment. Perhaps early attachment may be
known to have existed, as a further and surer pledge of
long years of felicity ; it may have been a match in
which the most thrilling and dehcious of all possible an-
ticipations seemed likely to bid fail" for completion, and
yet, — must it be admitted? — is such the severity of
suffering? — can disappointment so hombly mock the
hope of years? — dash down in a moment the fairy edi-
fice which the labors of a life have been delightfully
tasked in constructing? Alas! one hour's possession
may do even more than this. Or if baulked and baffled
eagerness be not subjected to so sudden mortification,
there may silently grow up a repugnance, wliich, spite
of evei-y effort to the contrary, becomes more intense at
every endeavor to repress it: a repugnance — an ina-
bility that has its origin in some cause, real or imagin-
ary, or haply m the discovery of some concealed hinder-
tnce to mutual desire.



Of Marriage.



97



But till' evils in ijuestion are widely different in source,
In natui'e, in degree, and in obstinacy; and one of the
objects of the present treatise is to separate and distin-
guish those whicli are, from the very few luJiich are not,
amenable to sldlful medical treatment.

The object contemplated by the Great Author of the
institution of marriage is the increase and perpetuation
of the sum of human happiness. This object cannot bo
attained save by individual virtue and ijrudence, acting
concomitantly with the diffusion of enlightenment and
the banishment of popular ignorance. Ignorance of a
density uuequaled — of an obstinacy imparalleled — long
prevailed, on the topics which control most completely
the fitness of men and women for wedlock. There are
certain states of injured health, capable, by early and
sldlful treatment, of thorough and speedy cure; but
which, if neglected or injudiciously dealt with, render
aught but disgust and misery in marriage a thing hu-
manly impossible. It very often happens, too, that these
morbid stages are, in their present and apparent effects,
so insignificant, so slightly discommoding, and so con-
nected with early imprudences long since relinquished,
or humiliating in description, that they are allowed to
gain gi-ound insidiously, tlu'ough the delusive idea that
the disease will cure itself — that wedlock can work an
improvement in a morbid condition, of which wedlock,
in some circumstances, is in truth tlie most active pro-
moter.

The consequence of such misapprehension is that a
contract of the most solemn kind is frequently entered
into under circumstances which cannot fail to produce
uuhappiness in a variety of shapes, — unhappiness wliich



68



On the Avoidance



does not terminate with the lives of the individual par-
lies to the contract, hut throws its gloomy shadow across
the path of posterity. The diseases thus engendered,
circulated, and perpetuated in society, form only one
section — though a most important one — in the chapter
of disasters referable to misconceptions of the true ob-
jects of marriage, and of the steps which must be taken
by M who would completely attain those objects.

A leading and indispensable step in the work of self-
knowledge and seU-preservation, is that of ascertaining
in the first place, upon authority which cannot deceive,
that in no part of the organization lurk even the most
remote admonitory symptoms of the past, present, or
prospective existence of any infirmities by whjch func-
tional and general vigor can be impaired. In this task
of self-examination the memory and conscience, not
less than the reason, must be consulted. Jt will be ne-
cessary to institute a rigid review of every habit, whether
relinquished or not, or every incident and circumstance
which impartial candor can suggest, as bearing in any
degree on the point to be elicited ; and reference must
be made to the faithful counsel of a physician whose
practice is chiefly devoted to that particular branch of
pathological science more immediately connected with
tJie subject of inquiry.

As an " unfortunate marriage" is, of all earthly calam-
ities, the most overwhelming and iiTcmediable, and as it
80 frequently occurs that persons enter ignorantly into
tlie solemn contract, to find, when too late, that they are
unfitted to realize its prmcipal ends, and under circum-
stances which malce dissension and misery its inevitable
•ttcndaut, n'> prudent man should take the irretrievable



Of Calamity.



09



Btep without assuring himself, through competent ad«
vice, that he is in all respects in a condition to do so.
But consultation with the physician is a mere mockery
and delusion imless there be perfect openness and sin-
cerity on the part of the individual seeldng his counsel.
Every question which experience may put should be
answered with truthfulness, as rigorous as if the eye of
the questioner could read the heart of the client. If the
latter fail in this duty, he is deceiving himself, and,
haply, laying the foundation of a life of anguish and
remorse, from which one moment's manly frankness
would have rescued him. He may rely on it, that if he
have unpleasant secrets to reveal, he can tell nothing
worse than his well-practiced adviser has listened to and
soothed. If, on the other hand, his conscience acquit
him of any self-incurred affliction, he can feel equally
certain of faithful information as to the existence of any
latent or semi-latent symptoms which may require to
be "suppressed and extirpated before the matrimonial
compact be entered into.

And here care should be exercised as to the class of
practitioner who is applied to. If, on the one hand, he
be an empiric, blindly adhering to an imaginary rule of
uniformity in cases each of which requires its separate
variety of treatment, — or if, on the other hand, he be
one who has so "diffused" his studies as to have
acquired only a superficial acquaintance with any one
branch of his profession, the chances are that he ia
unable to apply to the case before him such a searching
test as may eliminate the whole facts. The physiology
of the reproductive organs is a subject so intricate, so
extended, embracing so many complications and seeu*-



Physiological Facts.



kg contradictions, calling into requisition sucli an
amount of minnte research, olwervation, and comparison,
as to demand tlie exclusive, imwearied energies of the
practitioner who applies liimself to it It is a lliing
passing human capacitj', to master it in its manifold
details, unless the whole mind (prepared, of course, iiy
a careful education in medical science generally,) be
devoted to it. Hence it follows that the physician who
distracts his faculties by avaiiciously endeavoring to
gi-asp too many branches of practice, is a])t, fbrougli
mere ignorance, to treat with presumptuous levity, com-
plaints or applications in which an indefinite series of
human misery or happiness is' involved. Above all
'Jiings, therefore, the character and perfect qualifications
of the adviser should be ascertained; and then the
applicant may freely unbosom himself. It may be well
to apprize the reader that absolute secrecy as to the
identity of patients is the inviolable rule of the medical
profession (excluding of course, the loathsome vermin
who, under assumed titles and fictitious qualifications,
usurp and disgrace its name). Setting out with the
resolution to speak frankly and trutlifully, the applicant
may await the result with confidence. If ho have ills
or infirmities to be healed, they will be healed speedily
and radically ; whilst if " all he right " with liim, he wifl
have the comfort of knowing that it is so.

A few words now, on the general morale of marriage.
It may be laid down as a general principle, that when
there is a striking disproportion in point of age, heaJth,
and strength — when there is a manifest discordance in
temper and disposition — when there are disturbing
elements connected with religious or liimily fiuids, pru-



On Generative Capacity.



101



Jence would recommend that persons thus rehxtiveiy
circumstanced should, ou no account, commit them-
selves to the most soleroi. of earthlj engagements.
This is, assuredly, the rule of safety, though experience
daily shows that exceptionj occur. It is not usual, but
it does sometimes happen, that we see age and youth,
vigor and inflrniity, wisdom and stupitlity, allied ; with-
out producing any apparent symptoms of uuhappiucsB.
Such instances of what an actuary would term " depar-
tures from the averages," are rare; but they are sulH-
cieut to show that personal idiosyucracy is sometimes
so powerful as almost to overcome the ordinary rules of
Nature, who loves to exhibit herself clotlied in the
beauties of variety. Most dangerous it is, however, to
act on the authority of isolated exceptions. If Parr
survived his century and a half, Parr's next-door neigh-
bor would have been rather worse than an idiot, to
found his own arrangements upon calculation of reach-
ing the same comfortable climax of longevity. 11' a
certain noble peer begat healthy ofispring at tlireescore
and ten — the celebrity of this " freak of nature " proves
its rareness. If Cornelia bore children at sixty-two,
and if the illustrious Ilaller were rightly informed
respecting the still more venerable nursing-dame of
seventy, he would indeed be a sanguine man, wlio, upon
such interesting phenomena, should rest his ho])es of a
son and heir on a union with a damsel of tlf'y. The
averages " are, after all, the safest landmarks, i,a'dject,
however, to numerous exceptions.

Among the subj(!Cts wliich occupy the at'/d jtlon o/
the practical hygieologist, the proper age for <x)iilrii''tin4»
marriage hjia given rise to no small amount cojt-u-o-



*



li02 Physiological Facts on Oeneratvue Capacity.

T»rt%y; the result of which is, however, a pretty general
^Kreemer.t that, making: allowance for the diflbrences ol
ciiraate and temperament, the preserva'.ion of chastity,
by either sex, for several years after puberty has been
attained, is productive of effects not less beneficial in a
physical, than it is beyond all question, in a moral sense.
If excessively early marriages — those precocious unions
which we sometimes see, formed between boys and girls
of sixteen or seventeen years old — lead to the birth of
children whose parents have neitlier the means nor
experience to guide, to instruct, and maintain them —
if, in short, these improvident contracts lead to a morbid
increase of mere numbers — so, in like manner, tJie pre-
mature activity of organs which should quietly ripen
and mature, is apt to prejudice the physical vigor both
of the parents and tlieir ofl'spring. It sometimes ball-
pens that before a man has attained tlie meridian period
of life, even though no vicious irregularity have stained
his youth, his powers become debilitated through too
early sexual congress, whilst his numerous children are
sickly and enfeebled. This circumstance is often refer-
able to the fact of marriage having been entered into at
an age when the constitution of tlie individual had not
acquired the hardihood and compactness requisite foi
the active discharf-' of all the duties of wedlock.

Ie many nations, _ad at various epochs of history,
legislative regulations have been introduced with tJie
view of meeting this evil. "We find penal obstacles
imposed against marriage being contracted before the
Bges of thirty, twenty-five, &c., &c. But laws of this
kind must always be partial, generally ineffectual, and
fometinjcs mischievous. In the warm latitudes of the



On Wedlock and Offspring.



103



south it would not be possible, and if possible, it would
be tyrannical and pernicious, to compel young people
to postpone marriage until the age which would appear
timely and advisable in cold climates. Under the sun
of Hindostan, or even of Palestine, a girl is endowed
with all the functions of womanhood several years
before her faculties would reach an equal development
in the meridian of St. Petersbm-gh.* Again ; even
among persons born and living in the same country,
the variations of physical idiosyncracy ai'e so wide that
any useful settled rule is impossible. That which may
be absolutely indispensable to the health, the virtue,
nay, the very life of one, may be positively pernicious
in the case of another person of the same age, but of an
opposite Iiabit of constitution. At eighteen years, the
system of tlie one may have acquired a maturity, — an
exigent impetuosity of development, — which it may
take seven or eight years longer to produce in the other.
It is thus evident that tlie course of wisdom and pru-
dence is to treat every case upon its separate cliarac-
teristics and ckcumstances. Parents and influential
friends who adopt tliis advice, in weigliing tlie 2^i'os and
cons of arrangements on wliich suclx momentous con-
sequences depend, will find tlieir pains richly rewarded
by the blessings of those wlio may have to ascribe tbe
happiness of their lives to tliis laudable forethought on
the part of their guardians.

The same prmciple which governs the development,
Hpplies equally to the stages of change which precede



* It is here to be noticed, tliat Bvcn in the most northern Uiti-
tudes, peculiar physical developments lead to early pubertj
amongst ctrtaiu races of Laplanders, &o,



104



On Wedlock and Qffspring.



the collapse of the generative faculties. I will suppos*
thi'(!e neighbors, one aged flfty-five, another sixtj', and
a tlm-d aged sixty-five ; and of these the man of sixty-
five is frequently more capable and vigorous — younger,
in short, as regards the subjects treated in tliis work —
than his neighbor of sixtj', whUst the latter again is-
younger than he of fifty-five ; so niucli does constitution
uifluence the growth and duration of the powers of
manhood. That M'hich would be tantamount to a death
sentence in one case, may be safe, healthful, and advisa-
ble in another. Obviously impossible, as it is, to ajjply
rules of inexorable uniformity, the proper course where
doubt and uncertainty exist, is to take the advice of a
medical man of experience and chai-acter, who will at
once point out the necessities indicated by the respec-
tive peculiarities of teniperameut which he has to
consider.

That the happiness of married life may in a great
measiue be secured or defeated, by attention to or neg-
lect of what lies in om- power previously to its consum-
mation, is ixs true as that there are duties obligatory
alike upon both partieu after marriage. If a man have
made a hasty or thoug'jtless selection, the fault of haste
ur thoughtlessness is assuredly his own. As to the
period at wliich it is v >5est to enter upon this state, tho
advice of the grea' nioralist, Johnson, is striking:
"Those who marry r.t an advanced age will probably
escape the encroachr r-nts of their children ; but in dim-
inution of this advav(,.gc, they be likely to leave them
ignorant and helplcn., to a guardian's mercy; or, if that
should not happen, '/ tpy must nt least go out f f the
(Forld before they swi jicsc uucy love best, either wis«



On WedlocJn and Offspring.



108



or great." As to young women more especially, it is
certain that the natural exercise of the organs of re-
production has the happiest effect on tliose of a warm
temperament, excited by diet, inactivity, and other
stimulating influences. How often do we note the ces-
sation of frequent hysterical paroxysms, when the
subject of such attacks has exchanged the virgin for
the matron state. In this respect, the advice of Hip]";o-
crates, two thousand years old though it be, is equally
applicable in our own day. Hippocrates prescribes
maiTiage as the natural remedy, for not one, but many
seriously-w;isting female ailments. When, therefore, a
young marriageable maiden exliibit symptoms of the
approach of such chseascs as hysteria, ur irregularity, or
absence of certain secretions, the fact that such dis-
couragements are the result of continence, is Nature's
declaration that marriage is the best method of curing
them; and the sufferer should then, if possible, be
united to the object of her affections. Such symptoms
generally disappear after marriage, unless long habit or
some new disturbing cause, in a few instances, prolong
their stay ; health blooms again upon her cheek ; and to
her family and to society a being is preserved, who may
be one of their most amiable and valuable members.

In reference also, to the male sex, the remark is per-
fectly just, that, independently of many morbid affec-
rions and habits which marriage removes, it augments
the energy of the system of the blood-vessels ; the dis-
tended arteries, pulsating with firmer force, transmit
warmth and animation throughout the body; tlie
muscles become more vigorous, the step more elastic,
the voice firmer, — every physical attribute of humanity
becomes boldly developed.



106 On Wedlock and Offspring.

Allusion haa been made to Dr. Johnson's opinion in
favor of eai-ly marriages. But tliis opinion is to be re-
ceived ouly with a qualification. That the offspring of
an aged parent is apt to inherit mucli of the debility and
decrepitude which naturaOy attend old age ; that the law
of Nature and the dictates of prudence discountenance
the marriage of the old to the young, as an ill-fitting
conjunction, tending not only to the discomfort of the
wedded parties, but to weak health and short life, as the
inheritance of the fruits of such unions, is indisputable ;
but scarcely less grave are the mischiefs which ensue
from precocious marriages — from marriages which take
place before the parties have attained a considerable
degree of maturity. The great physical degeneracy of
the Polish Jews has been attributed more to the custom
of marrying, generation after generation, within near
degrees of kindred, than to ttie connubial association of
very younf persons. In many parts of the Continent
similar results have been observed to arise from a like
custom ; and it may be accepted, as a general rule, that
no conoummation of matrimony ought to take place
before each party has arrived at adult age. IS it be a:'-
gued that very early marriages check libertinism, it ma;
be responded with perfect truth that they tend with
equal effect to the production of a sickly, suffering, short-
lived progeny, who, fortunately for themselves, seldom
reach manhood or womanhood, and are, in fact, "not
worth rearing." The best preventive of libertinism is
vigilant and judicious training, combined with careful
inculcution of the sacred precepts of religion. Viola-
tions of the wholesome laws of Nature in one direction,
are not to be prevented by the violations of tlie sacw



On Physical Contrasts.



vn



mles in anotlier direction ; and the effeminate and fero-
cious character of Louis the Eleventh, of France, is only
one of innumerable examples of the effects of the ex-
haustion of the nervous powers, and the perverbiou and
destruction of some of the most important of the human
faculties, consequent on too early congress. The lapse
of two thousand years has confirmed the truth of the
principle enunciated by the plulosopher who declared
that " precocious marriages oppose a good generation ;
for in the entire animal Idngdom the fruits of the first
signal of reproductive instinct are usually imperfect, and
have not any well-established form. It is also the same
with the human species, and the cause is evident ; for
precocious marriages procure small and contemptible
men." The wisdom of this has been confirmed by the
experience of all ages down to our own.

In animate as well as inanimate natm-e, one of the
greatest charms is contrast and variety, and the influ-
ence of this is conspicuous in the relations between the
sexes. It will ordinarily be found that the members of
the softer sex fix theu' affections upon individuals distin-
guished for the possession of the masculine qualities most
opposite to the female characteristics; and so, vice versa,
with respect to the attachments formed bj males towards
females. This, as I have obseiTed, is the effect of a great
natural law. Admu'ation of any Idnd is, in general, di-
rected more intensely towards that which we do not,
than towards that which we do possess, and towards
the qualities most different from those with which we
are ourselves endowed. On the same rule, by which an
animal cannot feel sexual emotion towards itself, it feels
comparatively little towards that which is like itselij



108 In Connection with Marriage.

wliiisl the feeling is intense '.owards that which is unlike
It, So we observe that man .ooks for delicacy, flexibility,
and gentleness in liis mate; woman, for strength, firm-
ness, and power. In the vital or reproductive system,
men and women arc found instinctively to seek and ap-
prove opposltes ; so, love from a man towards a m;v^cu •
line woman would be I'elt to be an ill-ordered association ;
and an effeminate man is repugnant to woman, whose
weakness seeks support, in tlic wants which it feels or
in the dangers ^^'hich it imagines. The classic statue of
Ilector and Anckomache must assuredly have been em-
bodied under the insphation of the poetry of Homer.
The sylph-like mother clings about the manly form of
her noble husband, armed for the fight, as she fondly
yet proudly exclaims —

"Too daring chief I ah, whither dost thou run?
Ah I too forgetful of thy wife and son."

Froqu'^nt instances have occurred in wliich an ill-as-
forted union, brought about by compulsion, by merce-
nary motives, or any otlier of the thousand conventional
ir flueuces " wliich war Avith Nature's honest rule," have
taused a married couple to be not only unfruitful, but
»irtually impotent between each other, though otherwise
i-'erfectly competent to the performance of the offices ol
f vocrealion. Thus, a married couple have often bceu
observed to be childless, until, on the death of one of tlio
iiartiea, permitting the survivor to form a more eligible
ohoice, the usual consequences of marriage were soon
apparent. Further even than tliis, a wedded pair have
been known to be sterile, though after divorce each has
become prolific with an mdividu;d of opposite constitu-
tioiis; and it is well known that the test of congress waa



In Connection with Mamage.



109



abolished in France in the seventeenth century, owing
to the circiu-flstance that M. de Langeois, tliough inca-
pable of the duties of tlie married state with his own
wife, was very fruitful with another lady better suited
to him.

It nay be safely affirmed that a difference in temper-
ament between married persons is conducive, not only
to mutual alfection, but to fertility. Nature appears to
disapprove aU unions in which her principle of differ-
ences and contrasts is chsregarded. She wishes mar-
riages between different families and nations, because
such crossings of the various races improve and invigor-
ate the species. The mental weakness, as well as physical
predicament, of some of the European royal families, are
strongly confirmatory of the evU of alliances within nar-
row limits, and daily examples confirm the validity of
the principle. Pallas adduces the fact that the inter-
marriages of the Mongol Tartars with the Russians and
Persians, produce veiy fine individuals; while Hum-
boldt and others have observed that the offspring of
Europeans and persons of the Ethioi^ic race are pecu-
liarly robust and active. The philosopher just named
argues from this, that the best mode of eradicating
HEUEDiTAEY diseases, gout, scrofula, consumption,
madne-ss, epilepsy, etc., in their early tendency, is by
the commixture of the species in intermarriages, which
ari-angement often prevents the transmission of such
diseases to the next generation. If all conjugal unions
were assorted after the dictates of nature, or the secret
instinct of sympathy, nothing, without doubt, could ba
more delightful and lasting than the bonds of Hymea
By well-ordered natura' alliances both sexes becorae



110 Physical Contrasts v. In-Breeding.

better aud more perfect, the mutual abandonment of onf
to the other forms one being in two bodies, cai'c is less-
ened by participation, and ple;isure rendered doubly
exquisite.

The instinctive feeling of repulsion which we experi-
ence at the mention of the intennarriage of very near
relatives, bears silent but eloquent testimony to the fact
that Nature prefers a wide range in this respect ; and
physiologists concur in referring the corporeal and men-
tal degi-adation of many ancieut aristocracies and
princely houses to the narrow limits w.ithiu which mat-
rimonial selections ai-e made — to the system (speaking
in homely phraseology) of "bi'eeding in and in." Mr.
Walker, in his celebrated work on " Intermarriage," ad-
vances a theory which has received much confii'mation
ft"om subsequent inquiries, and which my own extensive
observation enables me in great measure to corroborate,
viz., that a given half or division of a child's organiza-
tion is for the most part imparted by the male parent,
and the other half or division by the female parent; con-
sequently that continual transmissions, generation after
generation, of idiosyncracies which have not been health-
fully varied — or it may be said, "ventilated" — by ac-
cession of fresh blood, had inevitably led to depravation
and debility. The noblest race of living beings woidd,
by this long-continued process of "family alliances," be-
come degraded, and in time, extinct; and the inile here
Indicated extends from man downwards, through the
whole realm of animated creation. Mr. Walker argues,
that by the laws of resemblance the qualities of the
iather and mother are communicated to their progeny,
"not in various and minute fractions, but in halves, In



Evils of In-Breeding.



Ill



the anterior or the posterior series of organs, and in no
other way ; " and that hy placing himself in suitable re-
lation to an appropriate partner in marriage, the jxirent
hiis " the power to reproduce and preserve either series
of organs, — the best, instead of the woi-st, portion of
iiis organization." Mr. Knight states, as the result of
half a century's experience, that the most vigorous ofT-
spring, bodily and mentally, is, with scarcely any excep-
tions, that of persons of different hereditary tempera-
ments. This variation is unattainable under the system
of in-breeding amongst a limited number of families —
a system which long ago elicited from a gi'cat British
sm'geon* the following remonstrance: —

" The marriages of high rank and of hereditary wealth
are generally concocted in muniment rooms, where the
estates of heirs and heiresses are entailed, together with
the personal peculiarities, moral defects, and hereditary
diseases of each family, and perpetuated as far as law,
signings, and seals can extend them. Hence the fre-
quent termination of such ill-bred races ; while in every
ancient village of considerable thougli not shifting popu-
lation, the names of humble families have continued for
more ages, though Ill-recorded, than those of the proud-
est gentry."

This disastrous state of things has happily, of lato
years, been much changed for the better by numerous
intermarriages between members of our wealthy families
and the sons and daughters of prosperous persons of
humble origin, who infuse the invigorating freshness of
variety into the " sang pur" of their courtly mates. To



•Sir Anthony Carlisle.



1J8 Malrimonial Disappointment



this circuirstance may be attributed the gradual recov
ei7 of our aristocracy froui tlie lameutable effemiuacy
corruption, and degeneracy into which it had declined.

These remarks are intended to have a practical bear-
lug upon the principles which ought to guide persons ol
either sex in their irrevocable choice. True philosophy
teaches, after all, tliat to be natural is to be wise; and
even the simple dictates of the bodily organiz-ation are,
if not infallible guides, (wliich they are not,) at least
more safe and trustworthy than those of mercenaiy
sordidness and greed.

Having dwelt thus much on the condition, the observ-
ance or violation of which so materially influences the
happiness or misery of the marriage state, the vigor or
decrepitude of offspring, the welfare of individuals and
of society at large, it is important to observe tliat there
are numerous incidental affections which, though re-
movable by judicious medical treatment, exhibit so many
of the overt synaptoms of hopeless and incurable infirm-
ity, that, in the absence of the knowledge that effectual
relief can he administered, their presence inflicts the
bitterness of despair and the anguish of shameful hu-
miliation upon thousands. The prevention, the sup-
pression, and the alleviation of suffering arising flora
these causes, are one of the purposes of my present
labors.

For, even when matrimony is contracti^d under the
most promising auspices — when all seems fan* as a sum-
mer landscape, — how often there comes a blight of un-
foreseen and dismal character, crushing hope, evoldug
despair, sowing thscord and strife amongst entire fami-
lies 1 We all know that this is an every-day ocxiiuTeuce:



Extmplified and Treated.



113



^1, tlie causes — the fundameutal causes — of the anoin-
uly are generally hidden behhid the dark curtains of
personal and conventional pride.

The principal of these causes it forms the labor of Hiy
life to sift, to identify, and to remove. My ijrofessionai
experience has brought me so much into contact ■with
persons of all grades and stations, and of various men-
tal and 25hysical temperaments, that I feel myself justi-
fied in speaking with the freedom of one whom a fund
of mournful knowledge has made acquainted with facts
which give language authority.

In the first place, then, it is a truth which it would l)e
not only useless but mischievous to disguise, that a prime
and leading som-ce of connubial infelicity is the inter-
vention of certain physical phenomena, which in some
measure interfere with the perfect fulfilment of the sa-
cred institution of marriage. It is not in some cases
until years have elapsed, that the existence of these
phenomena has been discovered ; in some the discovery
dates from the bridal day itself; in otliers they seem to
arise suddenly from some cause, which, without medical
investigation, the sufferer cannot even conjecture.

An example will suffice to illustrate some of these
Bets of circumstances : — Many years since a marriage
took place between a lady and a gentleman, who, to use
the homely but expressive phrase, were in all respects
" well matched." Age, health, pecuniai-y circumstances,
and every element o." harmony, seemed to foretoken a
life of mutual satisfaction, and to promise an offspring
of the quality which gladdens the parent's heart. All
went well for a wliile; in due time a child was born,
with every outward indication <jf sound health; iu a



114



Conjugal Precepts



few weeks the infant sickened and died. This was the
more regretted, inasmuch as fiimily settlements had
made it more than usually important that there should
be cliildren. Better fortune was hoped for. The next
child was still-born! And this sad dternation went on
for six or seven years ; the infants in no case surviving
beyond a week or two. The state of things grew most
painful ; relatives on both sides became entangled in dis-
cussions which promised anything but a friendly con-
clusion. The mysterious loss of many successive child-
ren, whose parents were to all appearance so well fitted
for the performance of their respective functions, baffled
the ingenuity of the family physician, and at length be-
gan to excite suspicious of a kind the most injurious to
third parties. At length medical advice was taken else-
where, and the husband was muiutely questioned as to
any antecedent circumstances which could by possibiUty
have affected his present state of health. He stated
that in his youth he had suflered fi-om a disorder which,
as he believed, " had been perfectly cured." An examin-
ation took plaee ; after rigid analysis it became evident
* that there still existed in the system some smouldering
remains of the evU. Light now began to set in ; wife
and husband were persuaded to live apart for a few
weeks, and a powerful alterative and purifying process
was resorted to in the case of each. They then resumed
cohabitation. Three or fom' children, gi'owing up in the
bloom of health and vigor, are the fruit of the re-uaion.
But, mark tlie consequences of the neglect, on the part
of the husband, to take advice before his marriage from
a thoroughly-qualified practitioner, as to whether there
were anything " to be set r ight " before the union was



And Fiiendly Counsel.



lie



ewnsummated. Half a dozen lives sacrificed ; a wretch-
ed interval of anguisli and mutual reproach ; family dis-
sensions, which, once excited, will perhaps never b«
ti'uly reconciled ! Fortunate that the evil effects of cul
pable neglect proceeded no fui-ther. Such is one of the
least distressing illustrations of the neglect of an obvi- ]
ons and easy duty.

Whilst on the subject of the health of children, it is
important to take notice of the cases in which, though
many incidents besides incapacity of tlie procreative
powers on either side, there has been no oflspring what-
ever. Such deprivations of life's chief blessing some-
times arise out of conditions the very reverse of those
which popular prejudices usually assign as the sole cause
of non-fruitfulness. It happens, not very unfrequently,
even where morality has never been departed from,
where the strictest fidelity has been observed on both
Bides, where there is no overt disease, no hereditary pre-
disposition to disease, no deficiency or malformation ol
the essential organs, that no offspring is forthcoming to
crown the happiness of the wedded pair. Now, in many
Buch cases, the very ardor and redmidant warmth of
love are the agents which defeat their own object; in
others, the disappointment arises from ignorance of a
few simple and salutary maxims respecting food, repose, ,
and season. There is more important truth than is
generally imagined in the ancient maxim — ''Labor,
cibus, potio, somnus, Venus," (Labor, food, drink, sleep,
l')ve ) ; and it is equally worthy of note by those who hope
to be the parents of a numerous and vigorous oflspring,
that the wished-for consummation is seldom accom-
plishod, save under th^ influence of " natural and vigor-



110



Friendly Counsc,



ous de»5>re and impure." Cliikkeu propagated during
Intoxication are oflen decrepit iu body, and still inoro
BO in mind. Finally, very fond couples will do well to
remember that the cherished object ol" their wishes is
marred rather than promoted by a too frequent or im-
petuous induigcnce of their emotions.

There is yet anotlier class of cases, in wliich the ab-
sence of chikken involves serious consequences, not
merely as regards the discomfort of tlie maiTied state,
but in reference to the arrangement of property, and to
many other objects which ^vill suggest themselves to
readers of intelligence. Extraordinary but well-authen-
ticated nan-atives are on record, of eiforts made to be-
come parents through the violation oi' more than one of
the laws of morality. As instruction, however, and not
mere amusement, is the object of this treatise, it will
suffice to remark that in the vast majority of the cases
under review, timely application to efficient medical
counsel would remove both the agony of disappointed
hopes and the temptation to use vicious means for the
fulfdment of these hopes. There are few causes of dis-
qualification which cannot be eflectually subdued by the
uppliances of science and experience — by the guidance
of a physician whose devotion of all liis facnltie;? to
the investigation of the functions of reproduction, fur-
nish a guarantee of his capacity to adapt his treatment
to the distinctive exigencies of each particular case.
Let this i-Tecaution be adopted, and rarely indeed will
the object fail to be accomplished.

By a careful observance of these admonitory Iiint.s, I'l
attention to the duties which each stage of existent*
calls into action, tbo great end of marriage — the hcui^-



And XTsefal TrutJis.



117



the liapiJincss, and natural reproductiou of our species—
wil] be prompted to au indefinite extent; and countless
scenes of miserj', degradation, and wickedness, be finally
extirpated from the earth. Tlie ways of virtue are the
ways of Nature — once Icnown and followed, they will
be foimd infinitely sweeter than those haunted by the
infatuated votaries of inordinate iudidgence. Miicli
must be left to the vigilance of parents, teachers, clergy-
men, and all having the care of youth, to prevent the
seeds of vice from being sown in the minds of tlicii
charges ; to preclude all possibility of the younger being
corrupted by tlie elder ; and, trampling on the hatefu!
and deadly prejudicies created by the demou of false
modesty, to be careful in inquiry, and delicate but firm
in exhortation. Much will then depend on the mental
training of the youth, whereby he may avoid those
quicksands of passion on which so many have been
shiiJwi'ecked. The ages of ignorance are said to liave
pjissed away forever. Shall we continue to tolerate that
most hateful vestige of ignorance tliat would cloak and
hide a fi-ightfid evil, which it rather becomes us to en-
deavor to remove ?

As to those who have attained mature years, who
contemplate matrimony, or who have already under-
talvcn its obligations, and would eflectually seciu'e the
blessings,, and as eflectually avert the evils, which are
(it is hoped,) sufficiently clearly uidicated in this treatise,
tlie pathway of health and safety, of happiness and
longevity, is pointed out to them, — let then- own reason
dictate to them whether they will follow the auspicious
track.

Thus, to all stages of life, to all variations of constJtU'



Physical Infirmity:



Uon ftud temperment, to all grades of social or profes-
Bloual position and circumstance, the subjects which
form the staple-matter of examination and elucidation
In tliese pages are pregnant with cousidRrations of in-
terest and utility. The experience of a life has con-
vinced me that, of the undefined causes of unhappiness
which perplex the politician and the philanthropist, an
enormous proportion is referable to the dire neglect
with which the more secret and difficult branches oi
physiology have been treated by the majority of medi-
cal practicioners. One of my most cherished objects
Is that of awakening the convictions of my medical
brethren to an active sense of the duty of giving to
this department of pathology that studious and respect-
ful attention which its importance eminently desei-ves.
I feel that if I can effect this I shall have done much
towards ensuring the desked result of my labors.

But I have yet another object, — one equally in uni-
ion with the aspirations of the eminent men to whose
remonstrances against pernicious anomalies and prejudi-
ces allusion has already been made. That object con-
sists in the diffusion of such an amount of popular
knowledge as may serve, at least, to instruct my feUow-
beiugs as to the extent to which the miseries and felici-
ties of life are involved in a line of conduct over which
each one of us has control — viz : the observance or neg-
lect of the celestial lights of nature and science.

It is right and useful that all men should know that
there are principles of personid management which
cannot be violated without the incurral of grievous pen-
alties ; it is right that they should know, when wisdom
Bnd regret suofieed the hey-day of inconsiderate self-



Its Causes and Cure.



lift



Indulgence, how these penalties may be uitigated, and
how the sting of their bitterness may ultimately be re-
moved; it is right that they should understand the
beginnings of evil, that so the evil and its consequences
may be avoided; but it is almost equally important
that the innumerable host of sulTerers who are already
experiencing the agony of disappointed hopes, and the
humiliating degradation of a baffled existence, — it is
almost equally important that these should be made
aware that the most absurd of all emotion is that 0/
despair; that physical infirmity is incalculably aggra-
vated by permitting th« mind to brood overmuch on
misfortunes which men should seek to remedy instead
of dissipating theu- energies in idle lamentations ; that
mental prostration is the fertile parent; of bodily imbe-
cility and anguish ; and, above all, that thei'e is scarcely
any degree cf weakness or functional derangement to
which the timely aid of science cannot apply a cure.
The cases are not counted by scores, but bj^ hundi-eda
upon hundreds, in which I have found a patient hiisten-
ing to, or already immersed in, an abyss of woe, re-
morse, incapacity, and deprivation of hope, and have
left this same patient in thethanlvfid enjoyment of vigor
and buoyant spirits. In the course of a widely-extend-
ed practice and correspondence sitch instances are of
continual occurrence; and they have sometimes pre-
sented themselves under circumstances which made the
conservation of titles and large properties, the dignity
and perpetuation of ancient and time-honored races,
contingent on the effectuation of the gi'and object of
marriage. It is unnecessary to add more, before pro-
ceeding to a detailed exposition of the subjects which



120



A Vigorous Posterity.



enter capitally into the consideration of the Practica*.
Philosophy of Marriage. It is a topic, the interest of
which commences with earliest infancy, and does not
cease until man is consigned to his last narrow resting-
place. That the latter catastrophe should not take
place imtil Nature's course is faulyrun, — until the ven-
erable dignities of a hale and happy old age have been
enjoyed, — until a virtuous, healthy, vigorous posterity
is seen flourishing around each honored grandsire ; that
destructive vicionsness be extirpated, and innocence and
felicity take its place ; such are among the high designs
with wliich the following pages have been composed ;
and, actuated by this spirit, I fee' myself guilty of no
presumption when I bespe;ili the attention of my fel
low-men in all countries, to the warnings, the exhorta
tlons, and the instructions therein contained.



/



The Causes of EdL



121



SECTION IV,

ON BPERMATORRHCEA (EXCESSIVE SPERMATIC DIS
CHARGE, OR SEMINAL DEBILITV) — ITS HISTORY
AND CAUSES.

My chief design, iu composiug the present work, is t»
furnish persons uninitiated in professional mysteries
and technicalities with information sufficient to lead
them to the adoption of those measures of precaution)
prevention, or cure, which ma}', in certain states of the
system, be necessary for the preservation of health, for
its restoration when damaged or jeopardised, and for
the arrest of disease, either imminent or present, ere it
reaches that desperate stage with which even skill and
science would grapple in vain. I think it right to state,
in the first place., that the term " Spermatorrlivea" (a
Greek derivative,) indicates an excessive and unnatural
loss of the seminal fluid.

This all'ectiou, which is often the precursor and cause
of a train of the most due, excruciating, and deadly
maladies to which the human frame is su)>ject, has vari-
ous origins — the principat of which, (and that wliich
Is infinitely more general and destructive than all
the others put together,) is the practice of that fearful
habit which h;is slauglitered so many victims at the
shrine of the Moloch of sensualism, and which may bo
delicately, but I hope sufficient plainly, indicated aa
Solitary Vice.



122



The Causes of Evti.



The promotive causes of Spermatorrlioea, in its mean-
lug of seminal weakness, are of several kiuds ; but the
cases wliiek arise from all the others put together, are
not one hundredth part the number of those proceed-
ing from self-abuse, the di-eadful cousequcuces of which,
In their multiform shapes, form a principal subject —
a subject painful as it is important — of the present
work. Among the secondary causes are vene)-eal
excesses of the natural kind, which come probably next
in degi'ee, though still at a vast distance. Organic
disease of the testicles is another cause ; to which may
be added loug-continued aud obntinale gleets. The
evil is also occasioned by the action of a variety ol
nostrums prescribed by injudicious medical men; and
there are several kinds of congenital and local mal-
formation which, if not obviated or removed, teud di-
rectly to tlie production of the malady. Certain cu-
taneous eruptions, causing itching on particular and
sensitive parts of the body, are sometimes found to
produce a similar effect; again, constipation or tight-
ness of the bowels, and the irj-itation of the rectum or
lower bowel by multitudes of small worms, termed as-
carides, are another cause. Local accidents to the
genital organs, or those adjoining, likewise to the head,
and colds arising from damp or otherwise, at times lead
to some of the consequences of Spermatorrhoea ; and
sedentary habits, long riding on horsebacic* or even in
carnages, are iu certain habits of constitution found

• The prevalence of impotency among iho ancient Scythiang,
who almost passed their lives on horseback, and among cer
tain of the Mongol oud Tartar tribes, down to the present day.
1» well known.



The Sources of Evil.



r'roductive of the worst effects in this respect. Bui
as the influence of all these is absolutely insignificant,
either in extent or malignity, compared with that ol
self-abuse, I shall, for the present, pass them by, and
proceed at once to the consideration of that grand
source of mischief.

As connected with this subject, I may here observe
lhat anything like prudery or attempted concealment
respecting it is not merely one of the most vain and
foolish affectations, but one of the greatest practical in-
juries to morality of which mistaken good intentions
are capable. The most ancient and venerable record
of human events refers especially to abuse ; without
either sanctimoniousness or profanity, I may reveren-
tially afBrm that the Book of Books itself is not only
standing evidence of the heiuousness of the iin of Er
and Onan, but of the necessity of proclaiming that
heinousness to all mankind and the folly and wrong
of endeavouring to conceal it. Their crime was com-
mitted in the full consciousness of its inherent hatefnl-
ness, and therefore their punishment was most signal.
They dared to disarrange, to pervert the laws, im-
pressed alike upon the conscience as upon the bodily
organization of man. Theirs was presumptuous crimi-
nality, not ignorant frailty, but wilful impiety; and
their sad example has been left on record as A fearful
WAEOTNG TO ALL FUTDKE GENERATIONS ; as a measure
of the depravity of certain transgressions, and the in-
evitable certainty of retributive justice. Is it not,
then, gross infatuation on the part of human beings,
be they parents, guardians, teachers, or what not, to
attempt to set aaidt tliis holy »r(iiHcmce ; to set aside



The Sources of Evil.



the force and meaning of this great example by
palliy quibble and prevarication, or by any means
(as aJI siicli means are,) inconsistent with candor
and truth? Such devices merely create the danger

— nay, in many cases the absolute certainty — that
the evil may arise, and all its sad train of moral
and physical ruin be incurred, before the victim hc-
covies acquainted with the meaning of the warning,
BO wisely and so merciftilly set forth in the thirty-ei,u;ht!i
chapter of Genesis.* That this has oft en been the c:ise

— that young people frequently destroy tliemselves Iiy
falling into the habit in question, whilst in aljsolute
ignorance of the meaning of the word " Onanism," or
of the sacred text, I can state from the experience
gathered in the course of my own practice.

As to the pretence that any allusion, to solitary vice
may lead youth to the knowledge and practice of it,
that would really appear too shallow an argument to
be seriously dealt with. It is an evil against which it
is impossible to guard, save by warning and vigilance ;
for there are no circumstances conceivable in which
a child may not fall into it, if not timely informed of
Its consequences. In the family circle, among his
parents' seiwants, in private niid public schools, from
accidental a-ssociates — nay, by perverse instinct or
physical infirmity — the secret may be learned. The
practice of solitary vice — the bane of futm-e life —



♦And Onan knew tliat'thc seed should not be his : and it came
V) pnss when lie went in unto liis brother's wife, that lie sjiilt it
on the ground, lest that lie should give seed to his brother.

And the thiiiij which he did displeased the Lord, whercfora
ke alew him also. — Geyiesis, 36tb chapter, 9th and 10th verses.



Dangers of Hypocrisy.



12S



exista at all ages, from infancy upwards, but, chiefly
amongst children and youth. Even children of seven,
eight, and nine years liave been brought to their grave?
tlirough inveterate but unsuspected addiction to this
habit, which the unhappy parent discovers when to.i
late; and when we find tliat even /e)7mZe cliildren nv^
not exempt from it — when we find little female infants
offender years producing lascivious emotions by giving
themselves up to Anions masturbation* — when we
9nd that ignorant manipulation of nurses, working tlie
ruin of cliildren at the breast, and when pathological
•xperience makes us aware of the. innumerable iu-
jtances in which young people are injured through
their parents' erroneous idea that, until the arrival of
puberty, no vigilance need be exercised over " the ac-
tions of cliildren with regard to tlieir genital organs,"
it is high time that the honest and intelligent members
of a noble profession should protest against the hateful
hypocrisy alluded to, should defy it, expose it, oppose it
with might and main, and endeavor, with what force
they can, to pnt it down and render it as loathed and
despised, as it really is loathsome and despicaljle.

Away, then, with this wretched perversion of tho
meaning of the terms " nioi'ahty and delicacy," when it
is known and declai'ed by experienced physicians that
even disease itself, in a variety of shapes — such as
pulmonai-y consumption, — sometimes leads to con-
siderable and even violent venereal excitement, and
that the unclieeked, untaught propensities of tiie young
lead them, in infinite numbers, to perpetrate deadly



• A<>nal«« d'Hyjfelne rublique et de Modcciuo Legale.



Danger of Hypocrisy.



violations of tlie sacred ordinance in tliis respect. It
Is better (in the language of a great master of science,)
"to admit at once, tliat among otlier infirmities of
our natiire, causes, predisposing to masturbation, exist
within the human organization itself," and to talce
measures, at least as strenuous, against the development
of this all but universal infirmity, as are adopted with
regard to others infinitely less common, less seducing,
and less pernicious.

It is, therefore, my wish that this publication may
become extensively familiar to the superintendents of
our schools and collegiate educational institutions; to
the clergy, to parents and guiirdians, and all to whom
is entrusted the formation of youthful character. It
will be useful, without admixtiu-e or diminution, in
enabling them to make timely discovery of a hateful
practice among those committed to their care; and it
raay put them upon their guard, so as to enable them
to take such precautions as may be most flttmg to avert
the consequences. There are few of those who have
devoted themselves chiefly to the treatment of sexual
diseases, who are not deeply impressed with the general
prevalency of self-pollution. It is doubted by the mere
routine practitioner. Is it denied? He, of all men, is
least likely to be able to form an accurate conception.
He is precisely the last man to be consulted or confided
with the secret.

The family physician may be in possession of family
Bccrets, he may know the hereditary tendencies
common to them all ; but it is quite another thing
to become entrusted with individual secrets, — the
coofessioa that tlie solitary victim will not and



Self-Abuse.



127



cannot make to a father, a mother, a brother, or a
sister. The common medical attendant, never con-
sulted, and very wisely so, is just as ignorant of the
extent and prevalence of these pernicious practices,
as he is of the. best mode for their detection and
cure. I am sure that, in calling attention to the
evils resulting from every form of vicious iuvlul-
gence, I am adopting the most efficient means
to deter unwary youth from the snare ; and by point-
ing out to persons of both sexes the frightful evils,
both to body and mind, inseparably attendant upon
the grosser habit of self-pollution, I hold the warn-
ing beacon up to Nature, and mark the treacherous
quicksand upon which have been wrecked the hopes
and promise of many a noble youth now mouldering
in a disgraceful grave. Temporary distraction may
suddenly dethrone the self-determining power of tlie
will; life may become extinct under the influence of
momentary madness ; but the poor slave of filthy pro-
pensities is a deliberate suicide. And shall it be said
it is wrong to strip the mask oS this infatuation, —
to paint the horrors which await the unfortunate crea-
tures who venture near the edge of a moral gulf in-
discriminately buiying within its insatiable vortex the
happiness of Time and the hope of Eternity?

Self-pollution is the most certain, though not always
the most immediate avenue to destruction. It con-
stitutes a lingering species of mortality, and if it were
possible to study and invent some new refinement in
cruelty, surely tliat would most clearly desei-ve the
designation, which man deliberately points against
himself, — against not merely liis temporal but eternal



Self-Abuse.

■Vil'iuo- Dot by sudden wrench to tear himself away
from the anieuities of wile, children, and home, but
with his own hand imperceptibly to infuse a deadly
poison, slowly to rankle in the cup of life and embitter
each passing day; to shroud in gloom the darkening
future, and invite the king of terrors prematm-ely to do
'ais oJiice.

To describe more precisely tliis fearful infatuation,
Self-pollution is that detestable practice by whiih
persons of either sex may defile their own bodies, alone,
in secrecy ; and whilst yielding to lascivious imagina-
tions, endeavour to imitate and jjrocure to themselves
those sensations which nature has appended to the
commerce of the sexes. It appears to be one of those
impure liabits which are coeval with the world's long
history. It was the special vice of Home. Temples
•Rci'e erected to Venus Fricatrix,* in which the most
obscene practices, of which self-pollution constituted
one, Avere publicly perpetrated. The Fri(ja or Venus
of the ruder Scandinavians was honored with similar
vile observances ; and from this curious, yet filthy
source, we derive the name " Friga-daeg" (Friday) of
the sixtli day of the week. A word ia vulgar use,
expressive of the sexual act, has the same dishonorable
origin.

Unfortunately for the history of human nature, the
vice has been found coeval with every form of society,
savage, or civilized ; and the denunciations of the an-
cient moralists are of equal application at the present

•"From the Latin verl) "/rico " (to rub or chafe), whenM
"/Hctio " (friction).



From Bad Example, &c.



129



period. We find them uniformly express^ing the most
unmitigated horror at this abominable practice, as a
crime most monstrous, unnatural and filthy, odious
to extremity ; its guilt crying, and its consequences
absolutely ruinous : as destroying conjugal affection,
perverting natural inclination, and extinguishing the
\ope of posterity.

One of the greatest of living physiologists, — one of
tliose to whose energetic labors humanity is indebted foi
tlie decree of attention which, in modern times has for-
tunately been directed towards this subject, observes that
no error has inflicted greater ills on society, or produced
greater social, domestic, and individual miseries, than
that of parents who neglect the consequences which
may be pi'oduced by childi'en associating with servants,
schoolfellows, playmates, &c. Countless numbers have
owed their fall to this cause. But, besides the danger aris-
ing from evil example, there is that of the child acquiring
by himself, through accident or morbid precocity, hab-
its which may ultimately prove destructive. "In
Bome," it is remarked, " there is a kind of precocity of
sexual instinct which leads to very serious resrJts. In
these it often happens tliat the instinct arises long be-
bre puberty. Such children manifest an intiutive atr
iractiou towards the female sex, wliich they show by
ronsta)itly spying after their nurses, chambermaids, ifec.
These practices of children are commonly laughed at;
iut if they were regarded with more attention it would
become evident that the sexual impulse was awakened."
instances of this kind are, in fact, innumerable; but as
I am desu-ous occasionally to support the resiUts of my
iwn experience by reierence to that of such other prac-



130



The Curae of Ljnoraace,



titio)iers as have, like myself, addressed themtiel-\ es to
this department of physiological science, I shall here
quote a case in point from the reports of a contempo-
rary • —

" M. D , the son of a physician, when between

five and six years of age, was one day in sunnner in ilie
irvim of a di-ess-maker who lived in his family: iliis
girl, thinking she might safely put herself at hur ease
before such a child, threw herself on the bed almost

without clothing. The little D had followed all

her motions, and regarded her figure with a greedy eye.
He approached her on the bed, as if to sleep, but he
soon become so bold in his behavior, that, after having
laughed at him for some time, the girl was obliged to
put him out of the room. This girVs simple impi-ti-
dence produced such an impression on the chUd, that
when he consulted me forty years afterwards, he had
not forgotten a single circumstance connected with it.

" The continual occupation of his mind by lascivious
ideas did not produce any immediate effect, but about
the age of eight the most insignlQcant occunxince
served to turn his recollections to liis destructioa.
Having mounted, one day, on one of the move^ible
frames which are used for brushiug coats, he slid down
the atem which su]5ports the transverse bar, and the fric-
tion occa.sioned caused him to experience an agreeable
sensation in his genital organs. He hastened to remount
and to slide down in the same manner, until the repe-
titioi-i of these frictions produced eflects which he had
been far from anticipating. This discovery, added to
tlie ideas constantly belbre him, gave rise to the most
extraordinary abuses, and after a time to excessive mas-
turbation."



And its Avoidance.



131



Witlioat entering into detail upon tlie miserable ef-
ficts which resulted from liis practices, or describing the
utter destruction, pliysical and moriU, which ultiniaiely
occurred, it will here suiHce to observe that the instance
quoted is merely one of thousands of a like nature, iu
which childien and very young persons procure volup-
tuous sensations by masturbation, or by manoeuvres
wholly unsuspected by all around them. In some cases
tlie feeluig is produced by hanging irom doors, furni-
ture, &c. ; in others, by compressing the penis between
the legs; in others, by sliding down banisters, poles,
&c. A curious instance is on record where " an officer
of high rank experienced his first sensation against the
leg of a table, at the early age of ten years, and con-
tinued for several yeiU's to employ the same means." By
this proceeding the most dreadful subsequent effects
were produced. And here I would add my testimony
to that of a modei'U writer, who advises that " the ex-
treme sensibility which the genital organs manliest at
the period of puberty should prevent horse exercise
from being commenced at tliis period, as is usually
done." Tlie fact is, that some years earlier or some
years latei', is the safer ]ieriod. I have myself known
not a few instances in which the first voluptuous sensa-
tion, and the first emission of semen, were caused by
horse-riding; and in which, without recourse to any
oilier means of creating such emotions, debility and
'jj.]iotency at length ensued, which I had not less diffi-
culty in curing," than where the efiects had been caused
by other iri-eguiarities.

After much consideration, in shoil, no course appeal's
to me capable of etfectually guarding against the worst
efiects, resulting Cioiu the perversely ingenious contriv-



132



Proofs, Sad and Terrible,



ances,by which illegitunate pleasui-es are sd dearly pur-
chased, — no other course, I say, save that of reveaiing
the awful truth during the early dawn of reason, auil
iuspiring the youthful mind with horror of this, as oi
other sins. It is madness to wait even so long ats tlie
period of puberty. There is nothing so unwise as " the
coulideuce of the parents in the ignorance of tlieu' chil-
dien." I have demonstrated that long belbre the arrival
of puberty tlie genital instinct and impulses are ener-
getically experienced by many. At whatever sacrifice
of the innocent recreations of youth, this propensity
will liud means for gratification, unless there be both
watchfulness and wabning. The former M'ill be com-
/aratively useless — in some senses mischievous — with-
out the latter; for youthful curiosity is easily piqued. It
has been well observed that " Children's sleep is not al-
ways so sound as it seems." Patients have confessed to
me that in early childhood they have passed weeks
without enjoying nocturnal sleep, while seeking the
gratification of their instincts hy lying on the abdomen
manipulating the naval, and other almost inciedible
manoeuvres fraught with their future misery. Whilst
80 engaged, tlieir days were passed in listless drowsiness
and apathy; fond parents — yea, and grave physicians
— attributing tlie decay in mental and physical health
of the once-promising child, to every cause but the
right one.

But of all the causes and circumstances which load
to vicious liabits, and more especially to tlie deadly one
of masiurbaiion, not one can bear even a remote com-
parison to the coiTuptiug influence prevalent in num-
bers — I might say the majority — of schools, both mal»



Of the Extension of Vice.



133



•ud female. The statements which have appeared fi-om
time to time, iu couiiectiou with this subject aie, so far
from being exaggerated, very much witliin reality; —
and the reason is obvious. Wliilst a child remains at
home, the opportunities of, as well as the mstructors iu
evil arc few, if any. A depraved servant or playmate
fo! nis Csaving the exceptional and accidental causes to
wliich I have alluded,^ the most serious danger then to bo
encountered. At school it is otherwise. There he finds
tempters already initiated in vice, to whom corruption
and depicW-ity have been transmitted from numerous
Buccessions of former pupils, and where again it is en-
grafted on the fresh anivals."

" One eickly sheep iufecta tlie flock,
And poisona all the rest."

Most truly have these pfaces been described, as being in
many instances, foci and hotbeds of contagion, where
destnictive immorality assumes a thousand Protean
aspects, and where obscenity is instilled by every device
of example, pei"suasion, and menace. The sub-officials
hi these establishments are not always ignorant of the
existence of the evil, and are even sometimes criminal
participators in and active instigators of it. The prin-
cipals are, no doubt, either in ignorance, or on discover-
ing, endeavor to repress it — privately — without scan-
dal a.s they say. But on no account shall the public
know anything about it. Nor for tlie world should any-
thing transpire whereby the interests of sucli-and-such
an institution or college or seminaiy could be compro-
mised. Now this is, per se, a great mischief. Nothing
eflectual is done lest tiie character of the place should
suffer. So one or two rotten sheep are sent away qaio.tlj



134



Venereal Imprudences



ailer ;i note to their ])arents recommending their with-
drawal, and tv^eiity or thirty or fifty equally rotten oues
are pijiha^js left; for the iulcctiou somelinics extends to
the entire establishment. Thus things remain much ;is
before, save the occasional farce of an admonition ujion
immorality generally, — an exhibition which, from the
countenances of the hearers, would appear as if got up
expressly for the purpose of exciting the risible muscles,
S'ow here is a gi'ave, an awful anomaly, — an anomaly emi-
nently calling for legislative action of some kind in or-
der that special and systematic means should be applied
for its suppression. The morals, the constitutions, the
future manhood and womanhood of our growing popu-
lation are perisliing and rotting beforehand, vinder the
upas influence of a gigantic evil ; and deplorable will it
be if either sordid private interests, liypoci itical punctil-
iousness, or the imposture of a pretended regard for our
national diaracter for morality, be permitted to inter-
fere between it and its extinction. The latter pre-
tence is not less absurd and unfounded than any of the
others. The terrific prevalence of the vice in oui
schools and amongst our own youth, is matter of cer-
tainty, to conceal which is impossible, and would Ije fool-
ish and wicked if it were possible. But in other coun-
trics, more esjiecially those to which hixm-ious relii.e-
nieuts have extended, things are no better, as is
• cknowledged by the highest authorities in France,
.imerica, and England.* In short, the evil alhidcd t/'

* Tlio evil greatly preponderates amongst the male sex, .ns
conipiired with fcmnles. Rut tliat it rafri s witli doa<lIy vinilence
ev(tn riiiionKSt the hitter, may he jmlged from tlic ohservntion ot
Mr. Ifowlor, of Philadelphia, that women, young and appareiiUj



Illustrated in their EJfects.



ISA



is the uonster oue of civilization, in eveiy ph;uie of de-
velopment, from the bai'baric to the more ad'^anced
Btuge.

As aheady noticed, the effect of Venereal Excesses,
by which it is imderstood an oveifree or promipciious
mdulgence in sexual intercourse, is oilen the provoca-
tive of the disease of Involuntary Spermatorrhoea, — a
disease which, because not so evident in its inroads, is
all the more formidable than even those maladies, fi ight-
ful though they be, the severity of whose external
symptoms forces them early on the sufferer's attention.

modest, " are dying by thousands, of consumption, of female
complants, of nei-vous and spinal affections, of general debility,
and of other ostensible complaints innumerable, and some ol
insanity, caused solely by this practice." This testimony, did
It require confirmation, would receive it from that of Mrs. Gore,
'.r\ her valuable "Lectures to Ladies, on Anatomy and Physiolo-
gy." 1 may here observe that there arc numerous instances ol
ladies holding medical certificates and practicing as physicians
In the United States. Mrs. Gore is one of them, and enjoys au
extensive practice, as well as much reputation for ekill. In the
"Lectures" referred to she Bays: — "Some years since, my
mind was awakened to examine the subject by the perusal of a
medical work that described the effects of this vice (masturba-
tion,) when practiced by females. This was the first intimation
I had that the vice existed among our sex ; since that lime L have
had much evidence that it in fearfully common amovg them,
* * * Were this the particular vice of the low and vulgar,
there might be more excuse for the apathy and false delicacy
that pervade the community respecting it. But it invcule.t all
ranks. I'rofcssed Christians are among its victims. Our hoartir
ing and day scliools are sources of hitolerate mischief." Thcso
are native pictures by native writers. "With melunclioly truth ll
might be said in reference to our own, and, indeed moBt coun-
tries, — " Matato nomine, de te fabula narralur,"



136 Venereal Imprudences



In some instances the affection produced by venereal
excess is very difficult of perfect cure ; but there is a
wide difference as regards obstiuacy, bet-wecu tlic in-
firmity arising from promiscuous excess, and that ensu-
ing on imprudently frequent intercourse with one indi-
vidcal. In the former cases the work of cure sometimes
requires a considerable peiiod, while in the latter the
difflciilties are much less. Much, of course, depends on
the timeliness of tlie application for advice. K such
application be deferred until the constitution is seriously
injured, the obstacles with which the physician has to
contend ai-e proportionately greater.

Connected with sexual imprudence, the effects of
Gleets, generally consequent on attacks of Elennorrhagia
or Gonorrhoea, or as it is commonly called, Clap, are
sometimes found to be of an obstinately malignant
character. The generally-received notion among per-
sons unacquainted with medical science is, that the sting
of Gonorrhoea is quite trifling compared with that of
Syphilis. This is a great mistake. The effects of Syphilis
are externally more frightful, but the Gleet, consequent
on injudiciously-treated Gonorrhoea, is not less deadly
in its ravages. I may instauce a case in point which came
under my professional notice not long since. The pa-
tient was an officer in the army, who, twelve years pre-
viously, when a very young man, had been troubled
with what was described as " an ordinary clap." For
tills he was treated by some inferior practitioner, who
dosed him in the routine manner with cubebs, copaiba,
&c., &c., and, I had reason to suspect, resorted to a too
early use of astringent injections. He was then pro-
uounced "cured." Soon after a painless, gleety dis-



Illustrated in their. Effects,



137



charge was perceived, which, after continuing for several
months, was also stopped by some empirical preparation.
Here the "'cme" was supposed to be complete, but tho
uvil was only suspended. Years afterwards, and when
the gonorrhoeal attack was all but forgotten, (no fresh
infection having been contracted in the meantime,) the
gentleman's bodily and mental health became visibly
affected by some cause, which, wheo' the medical man
failed to discover it, was, as usual, considered to be
fanciful, and the patient was regarded as a Malade
Imacjinarie ; imaginary or not, however, his complaint
produced sad consequences, and I have seldom witnessed
a more pitiable example of prostration. Total sexual
impotence was only one of its symptoms. His abject
and miserable condition had been coming on by degrees,
and no one could account for it. Suspecting the real
cause, I submitted his urine to a rigorous microscopic
examination. The result was as I expected. The sper-
matozoa, — the characteristic of the human semen, and
which, in a healthy condition of the body, could not be
found elsewhere, existed in large quantities in his urine.
TJiese animalcules constitute the main material of the
seminal liquor, — the very essence of vitality. Here the
nature of my patient's misfortunes at once became self-
evident. He was sinking from Spcrmat'or)-hcea, unsus-
j-ected, unperceived, by himself and others. Furtlier
examination convinced me that he had been for a long
time thus suffering, and that the imperceptible insidious
discharge took place whilst at stool, as well as m the
act of emptying the bladder. In short, my patient had,
year after year been parting with life itself, descending
stage by stage, to the grave, as a consequence in the



138



The Miijcrlcs of Imprudence.



first place, of improper treatment of common gonorrhoea,
followed by gleet, and afterwards, through the inability
ol' the general practitioners whom he consulted to de-
tect the real nature of his wasting malady. Had it not
so happened that tliis was discove;-cd in tne mamior
which I have described, the scene would have soon
closed over another victim to what, with cruel mockery
Is termed, " imaginary " illness.

Melancholy has been the fate of modern times since
the venereal poison was first known and propagated;
ai\d sad are the sensations which must naturally arise
in the mind of every friend of humanity who considers
its nature and progress. This destructive agent acts
not merely upon individual life, but it contaminates
every spring, transmitting its dreadful influences to
generations yet unborn ; it embitters life's sweetest en-
joyments, separates husband and wife, parents fi-om the
affection of their children, and iuflicts a stab upon
domestic peace, from which, however forgivingly the
tender look of woman's eye may heal the oflTensive
wonnd, a scar remains upon memory and affection
while life endures. It breaks down the vigor of lusty
youth, covering the body with loatlisome ulcci-s, or
destroying the bones: and thus defacing the manly
beauty of the " human face divine." The sonorous
voice exchanges its deep rich tones for a piriable con-
temptible nasal twang, thus compelling the miserable
victim, with every word he indistinctly utters, to j)ro-
Dounce his own shame. Such are the revolting features
ol' Syphilitic disorganization; its horrible mutilations
are sluidderingly hateful beyond all possible concei)tion.
To crawl upon the face of this fair earth a noisome



J-



The Miseries of Imprudence. 139

mass of living rottenness ; to wiiste into Iiideous decaj,
fi-om slowly-consuniing disease and pain, — pain which
leaves the inind in lull consciousness to brood over
[last folly ; to defile the germ of humanity at tlie very
threshold and onset of its being; to transmit the scchIs
of disease to innocent, helpless infancy; to hear tli<!
feeble husky 'vaj", and look upon the hue, that mark iho
contaminaiion of the child which hangs at the breast
of a fond and vuiuoiis motlier, — that child which ought
to constitute the i^ride and joy of a father's heart, ljut
to whom his first gift has been a feeble, puny, and dis-
eased organization, the counterpart of his own, the
transcript of his own excesses ; surely, if there be within,
one latent spark of sensiliility, that infant cry will
harrow inmost feeling, will chase it out, will lash as
with a scorpion whip ; or, feeble though it be, speak in
dread whispers to the remorseful soul. Possibly the
victim of sensualism may have been spared the pains
of parental agony ; no wile may be there to pity and
to forgive. Paid mercenaries surround his couch. He
has ran the round of guilty pleiisure, till, giddy and
weak, he falls upon that couch to die — the wreck of
>outh, and hope, and life, together blended in one awful
desolation !

Who among us is not familiar with the history of
some promising youth, whose noontide sun of existence
li:i.s been tlmti in tears and death beclouded? To die,
— so to sink' into the grave, to bo rcmeml^ered only
i^i'li rcarliil regret, to forego the afluctionate recoliec-
ioii of surviving fi'iends. These fht-yn the slight yet
I'.iiihfiil outlines of a stern reality: and if the conlem-
,)!}ition of the picture deter bui one thoughtlesp vo'iUj



140 Miscellaneov.') Causes,

from the path of folly, bow much of human misery may
thereby be prevented ! Tt i? sainut:y to ponder over
the coimquences of Sensualism ; Lei ftiscinatlons derive
more tluin half then- charm from our ignorance of the
hidden sting that in the end will " bite like an adder."
Were tJiesc results ever present in all ,Jieir power and
permanency, could we sti-ip the gaiidy flattering mask
fiom jjreseut sersual gratiflcation, suroly we should
pause, rather than with reckless dcsper;ae heedlessness
rush upon disease, misery, and ruin : for

" Vir-e is a monster of such frightful mien,
That to be hated needs but to be Sieu."

The late Sir Astley Cooper observes: "If one of
these miserable cases could be depicted from the pulpit
as an illuatration of the evils of a vicious and intem-
perate course of life, it would, I think, strike the mind
with more ten-or than all the preaching in the world.
The irritable state of the patient leads to the destruc-
tion of life ; and in this way annually great numbers
perish. Undoubtedly the list is cojisiderably aurpnented
from maltreatment and the employmetit of injudicious
remedies.'"

There are certain orgauic malformations of the
Testicles, of the Penis, or othci portions of the genital
system, which lead to an irritation ending 'u Seminal
Weakness. Even so (apparently) trifling x cause as
^n unusually large foreskin, causing the formation o/
a wliite, pulpy substance on the siuface oJ the glans,
may so irritate the sensitive organs as, if not corrected,
to produce dangerous symptoms of Spermatorrhoeii.
The evil is also induced by the administration "(
various descriptions of drastic purgative fc-jd nstrii'



Including Irjunss to the Head.



141



gent mediciues, whicb, whilst perfectly adapted t
one constitution, may be most injuiious to another.
Congenital predisposition is a very untVeqiient canse.
Here, the seeds of disease may lurk for an indefinite
period in the system, until called into baneful activity
by some exciting influence, siich as a cold, a fall, a
blow, a violent mental affliction, excessive fatigue, &c.
Even a single unseasonable act of venery, though per-
formed in the most legitimate manner, and with an un-
tainted partner, may sometimes induce it.

Disorders of the skin, eruptions, itching, and morbid
Bcnsibility of the external surface of the body, injuii-
ously irritate the genital organs; and I have had
patients who sought my advice, aftf.r wasting into ap-
proximate unpotence under appUcations of " salves for
the skin," " cutaneous lotions," and other empirical
nostrums. Affections of the kind must be constilu-
tionally treated, in order that beneficial and not in-
jurious results may be obtained. The removal from
the internal system of the vitiation which creates the
pruriginous sensation, and the cautious but energetic
treatment of the spermatic discharge, are the means oi
cure indicated by science.

The infl.iencc of disorders in the Rectum or Lower
Bowel is also sensibly felt. In some cases, Sperma-
torrhoea is produced by mechanical obstructions to the
act of defectation or evacuation of the bowels. This
obstacle partakes of the nature of a strictiu^e, and
must sometimes be removed by a surgical operation.
Chronic diarrhoea, or looseness of the bowels, is often
perniciously cactive in inducing seminal weakness, aa
Is also, the opposite state, of constipation.



142 Facts and Philsophy.

I have alluded to the close connection between th«
organs of generation anil those of leasoii and percep-
tion. That connection is not merely sympathetic ; it
is direct and pal[iable. Accidental injuries to the
head, and especially to tlie posterior portion, tlie re-
sidence of the cerebellum, very frequently lead to the
suspension or temporary destruction of tlie genital
capacity. Among the striking instances of this liind
which have come before me in the course of my prac-
tice, was that of a medical man, a personal friend, and
once a fellow-student of my own, who unfortunately
met with a fall, by whicli the occipital bone was in-
jm-ed, and a sligut concussion of the brain ensued. At
this time my friend was a strong and healthy young
man ; so vigorous, indeed, were his recuperative ener-
g'es that, after an interval of insensibility, which lasted
a few hours, he was enabled to resume his pi'ofessional
pursLiite. In a short time, however, (having mean-
while experienced no particular inconvenience from
the accident,) he perceived a diminution of tlie volume
of the penis, and a shrinking of the testicles, accom-
panied by clamminess and morbid moisture. To these
symptoms were added great waste of llesh in liis person
generally, and a peevishness and moroseness of temper,
so opposite to his ordinary character, as to excite as-
toni.'^liuient, and ultimately alarm, among his friends.
, His misfortune amived at the climax, when, on essay-
ing an amorous embrace, he found himself totally in-
capable of eirectuating his intention. In this unenvi-
able predicament he applied to more than one proles-
sional man, wliose attempts to relieve him were as li'uit
less, ;is they were doubtless well meant. At length h



Facts and Pldlosophy.



143



visited myself, in a state of mind which very nearly
qualified him for a permanent residence in an insane
asylum; and, jd'ter relating the circumstances, dia-
posed himself candidly and in good faith, to my treat-
ment. I soon di.'-cenied the true cause of his alllic-
tions. It was entirely dependent ou tlie injury ho
had received in the head, — a fad which liad escapeil
llie perspicuity of the general practilioners, aecutlonied
to dissipale their aiteution among numerous branches
of practice, — the etiicient study of any one of vvluch
requires the ujidivided devotion of as much talent and
knowledge as a human being can hope to possess. As
my only object in mentioning the case is to exemplify
the intimate nature of tlic relations between two chief
sections of the organization, I need not detail the
course by which I brought the mat.ter to a happy con-
clusion, and restored the patient to the possession of
1l3 former excellent health and spirits. Suffice it to
say that the results of the accident, and the means
by which the cnrc was wrought, and a tidented and
deserving member of the profession rescued from the
downward path towards madness and death, have, I
have reason to believe, aroused his own attention, and
that of others of niy medical acqiiaintances, to tJie im-
portiuice of a brancii of pnysiological Iminiry in which
are involved consequences of great magnitude to the
interests of humanity.

Though the al;ove case has relation to temporary
impotence produced by cerebral injury, without any
lengthened continuance of Siiermatorrhcca, I have
thought it right to introduce it in this place, as it Uliis-
tratts the inunediato sympathy i>etwcen the respcctivf
sets of organs.



144



Facts and PhiloRopliy.



In fine, it, may be stated as regards the causes oi
Involuntary Spermatorrlioea that there is scarcely a dis-
turl)Ing iulluence to which the human frame is liable,
but Ynay ultimately resolve itself into an active pro-
moter of this disease. In the multitude of vitiaiuig
ch'cumstanccs with which the complex positions of
artificial society surround our daily life, it seems impos-
sible for any prudent man, without obtaining a skilful
opinion on his real situation, to feel assured that he is
not in some one of the stages of those " silent causes "
— erstwhile so mysterious — which send so many of our
fi-iends, neighbors, and relations to the grave. From
tills comprehensive and truthful description of the
almost universal nature of the provocatives which may
lead to morbid spermatic discharges, seminal weakness,
impotence, insanity, and death, I will not disti'act the
reader's attention by an attempt at specific allusion to
each of such provocatives. For instance, a single
night's drunken debauch, or the frequent use of tobacco,
is, hi some constitutions, capable of producing the evil.
An ordinary cause is the presence ot ascaiides, or small
worms, creating itching in the anus or fundament, and
leading to irritation of the generative organs; and thei-e
are other influences, which ignorance considers trifling,
but which are known to '' cautious science " as souicee
of calamity and death.



Symptoms of Seminal Weakness. 145



SECTION V.

BYMPTOM8 OF SPERMATORRHOEA, SEMINAL 'WEAK-
NESS, AND IMPOTENCE.

Ill proceeding to consider the symptomatic indications
of the presence of Spermatorrhoea, it is necessary to
observe that as the disease, in its progress, assumes a
variety of aspects, and increases in intensity at every
step, and as in tlie earlier stages the symptoms are some-
times (though not always,) absolutely imperceptible to
unprofessional persons, it will not be possible to ex-
hibit a description, however careful and minute, wliich
can enable men to discover, by self-examination,
whether they really are patients or not. In some cases,
It is true, the fact of present illness forces itself upon
the most stolid and passive dispositions; but in others,
— and these are very often the most dangerous, — the
disorder steals on the suflerer, instead of smiting him
Bo suddenly as to warn him that things are not as iJiey
ought to be with him. In the midst of apparent securi-
ty the enemy may be at the gate, nay, inside the ga>e of
the citadel of health. The only sure mode of ascertain-
ing whether or not he be near, is skilful medical diag-
nosis. In order, however, that the peoj)le of all con-
ditions may know as much as possible relative to
cucuinstances which may exercise so important jvn in-
fluence upon the happiness or misery of their whole
life, and upon the endurance of life itself, I will here
mention plainly some f)f the more overt tiymptoms, wluch



146 Nocturnal and Diurnal Discharges.



cannot be mistaken, and also allude to others, detec.tibla
by scientific investigation alone.

The symptoms of Sperraatorrhcea are divided into
Local, and Constitutional.

Of the Local Symptoms, the chief are discharge of
somen aL night, whether attended or not by venereal
. di eams ; and discharge of semen during the day, which
sometimes takes place visibly, in profuse emissions, but
most frequently imperceptibly, whilst emptjing the
bladder or the bowels. The appearance of spermatozoa
in the urine, is, as I have more than once mentioned, an
unmistakcable token of dangerous disease; but this
appeai-ance is wholly unnoticed by the patient himself.
Another local symptom, which sometimes becomes dis-
tressing, is an intermittent succession of " priapisms "
or violent erections of the penis, without any pleasur-
able sensation ; these erections being often followed by
great exliaustiou and a sense of weariness and prostra-
tion. Accompanying these, there is sometimes an al-
most invisible trickling from, — or rather, to the sigiit,
mere humidity at the extremity of, — the penis; a kind
of oozing, like unwholesome perspiration, which in reality,
111 its slow -but sure efl'ect, is not less debilitating than
Uie perceptible emissions. At the same time there is
apt to take place, on the occurence of a voluptuous
thought, Or when in the society of females, or even by
the accidental fiiction of the clothes, &c.,a thin mncus-
lik(! discharge, sometimes so very small in (luantity that
the orillce of the penis is not more moistened than if a
single drop of urine had escaped. The drop that does
escape, however, is the habitation of living beings; it is
a paiticle of the living seed, perhaps deteriorated by



Symptoms of Seminal Weakness, 147



disease, but the gradual loss of which is tantamount to
the destruction of the frame.

Tlie state of the penis and testicles is another indica-
tion. Though impotence may not as yet have super-
vened, the patient will, by vigilance, be often able to
detect a dimijiution of liis usual erectile power or, when
in the act of copulation, the semen will escape before
a proper degi'ee of penetration has been attained. This
state of things, if not altered, is the invariable fore-
runner of impotence.

Having obseiTed that nocturnal emissions may some-
times (though rarely,^ not be symptoms of disease, it
will be right to make a remark, by which persons who
are debarred I'rom seeking medical advice may have, ere
too late, some criterion by which to judge of their
physical condition.

NocTuitNAL Emissions, occueeing moee fee-
quently toast once in eveey foueteen nights,
aee decided signs of debility, and certain
haebi^•gees of appeoaching impotence. my
ample experience warrants the conclusion that the de-
bility is more obviously confirmed, and absolute impo-
tence more certainly follows, in those instances where
emissions occur within the above-named period, on
awaking suddenly in the night at the moment of dis-
charge. In many instances the sleep is not broken,
and it is comparatively difBcult to ascertain how often
the evacuation occurs; tlie consequences on the loss of
the seminal fluid are, however, sufficiently evident.
Occuring more A'cquently than can be lairly asci ibable
to the distension of healthy vessels, the most energetic
measur^js are instantly requisite to avert the identical



148 Nocturnal and Diurnal Discharges.

mischief whicli would arise, if the loss of the seminal
secretion were solicited and voluntary. Profuse and fre-
quent nocturnal emissions may, or may not, be con-
nected with the habit of self-pollution, aud, as the term
implies, may occur during the hours of darkness, when
the powers of the body are prostrate in sleep. These
morbid discharges are most frequently attributable to
the practice of self-pollution, and, in some cases, to ven-
ereal excess ; but may arise from disease of the testicles,
or from an enlarged or schirrhous state of the prostate
gland. It is likewise certain that lodgments of hard-
ened feculent matter in the large' intestines sometimes
operate as a mechanical irritant, and thus produce diur-
nal as well as nocturnal evacuations of the most impor-
tant fluid of the human body.

This is probably enough to say foi the present with
respect to Nocturnal Emissions. The Diuknal Dis-
CHAKGES, — those which occur at stool, wliilst making
water, or, as I have described, almost continuously in
chronic moisture and humidity o( the organs, aie of a
more corapUcated character ; for in numerous instances
they are undiscovered by the patient, — nay, unsuspect-
ed, — until the disorder has assumed a formidable atti-
tude. In cases of the latter kind, the evil may go ou
increasing for an indefinite period, the sufferer, unac-
quainted witli the laws of health and disease, being
wholly unconscious that he is undergoing a gradual loss
and annihilation of the vital functions; nay, being some-
times ignorant (so stealthy and treacherous is the pro-
gress of the enemy,) that any seminal loss whatever is
going cn, — and remaining in this state of lamentable
unconsciousness of his condition until the dread truth



t

Multiplicity of Symptoms.



140



reveals itself, in acute and agoniziDg disease, In prostra-
tion of his faculties, in some of tlie formidable symptoms
which force him, at the eleventh hour, to fly to medi\;al
succor for that relief which, by earlier application,
might have been^ much more eiisily, more quickly
obtained. Some of the most obstinate disorders with
which physicians have to contend are those which ha^'e
gained ground, during entire ir/norance on the part o^
the patient, of the existance of any unhealthy symptom
whatever. The generative organs, being the most deli-
cate and intricate portion of tlie system, are those most
subject to unseen and unsuspected disarrangements,
exceedingly variant in symptoms and diagnosis; and this
circumstance should suggest to prudent persons, young
and old, married and single, who would eflfectually guard
tliemselves against the possibility of impending ill, lead-
ing first to debility, then to torturing pain, to not less
torturing and humiliating impotence, and ultimately to
premature death, — it should, I say, suggest to all prudent
persons the wisdom and importance of self-knowI/-
EDGE in these particulars, — the duty of perfectly ascer-
taining, from competent .and legitimate authoritj', wheth-
er their phj'sical condition be sound and safe.

So much for some of the more prominent of the local
symptoms of Spermatorrhoea. The general symptoms
are literally, Legion. Connected, indeed as they are,
with every part of the human organization, it would
l)c difficult to mention any one feeling of functional,
mental, or constitutional uneasiness, which may not be
referabUi to this depraved condition of the system. By
a curious niisclassification some writers have accounted
iupoteuce as among the symptoms, whereas it ought



150



Local and Functional.



more properly to be refen-ed to tho effects, of the malady.
Uneasiness in the stomach, accompanied by flatulence,
giddiness in the head, pain or weakness in the eyes
Cwhicli sometimes cannot endure a strong light,) indol
ence, dislike of exertion, nervousness, dejection; excos-
Bive craving for food, foUov/ed by intervals dining whick
every description of nutriment is loathed; irregularitj
of the bowels, constipation alternating with diarrlioea,
headache, and pains in the ears ; whimsicality of ap-
petite; troubled sleep during the night, succeeded by,
days of gloomy apathy; uneasiness in the liver; flutter-
ing and palpitation in the region of the heart ; and
great sensitiveness to heat and cold, — are among the
derangements which often accompany morbid sper-
matic discharges. It is a curious pathological fact
that, during the progress of Spermaton-hoea, difliculty
of breathing, cough, and tightness of the chest, arising
m many constitutions from the seminal disorder, have
sometimes been actually mistaken for pulmonary con-
Bumption. The cough is often distressing, occasionally
dry, occasionally attended by au expectoration of an
ofl'eusive kind. 1 have no doubt that many patients
Lave been maltreated for consumptiou, when Spenna-
torrhcea was the real malady. That the latter loads to
th'.' former is certain enough ; but the stayes and con-
nections of the respective diseiises have been giossly
misimderstood by practitionei-s who have not had suf-
ficient personal acquaintance with the indications ol
Bcminal emission. s

It has been remarked that Spermatorrhoea is, in its
early sLagcs, frequently attended by an increase of ap-
petite—a species of voracity accompanied (with ap-



Indications of Self-A*rasv.



151



parent incoasisteiicy,) by a feeling I'f disgust. Spiced,
Bavoiy, and liiglily-seiisoned food is souglit for, and
tlie digestive organs being out of order, it is vainly at-
tempted to streugtlieu tliem by recourse to strong
drinks, &c. Tbese stimulants only lead to »u increase
In the morbid discharge, and conseuuent continuous
weakening of the system. The whole digestive economy
is gradually ruined, notwithstanding which the patient
may perhaps retain much healthfuJness and fieshness
of appeai-ance, and even gather flesh. Bui Dieanwhile
the evil is taldng root.

The senses of sight, hearing, taste, and smell, are all
more or less aflectcd. The loss of the brilliancy, —
of the " honest courage " of the eye, is a symptom of
iSeminal Weakness, (especially where the disorder ^l^s
arisen from malpractices,) which I have met with so
constantly that I may term it an invariable accompapi-
ment. The look of the patient reveals his secret to ihe
glance of experience, though it may escape the empulst
and the superficial. "There is always," obsei-ves a
renowned commentator, " more or less dilation of tue
pupils under these circumstances, and this probably
conduces to (jive the eyes their singular appearance.
To the want of expression is joined a timidity or ap-
pearance of shame, especially in such as practise mas-
turbation. Their eyes never meet those of another
wiMi confidence. They are turned away hastily, and,
after wandering about, are at length directed to the
giouiid. Tlicre is, in this uncertainty of the organs of
vision, something analogous to the trembling of the
voice, hesitation of speech, stuttering, produced by
emotion, and instability of the lower extremities,



152



Seminal Weakness.



habitual agitation of the hands, palpitations, etc.— all
common symptoms in these cases."

With reference especially to the practice of self pol-
lution, whicli is the most usual cause as well of tho
symptoms as of tlieir effects, the late Dr. John Arm-
strong, taking notice of the peculiar look and gait oi
those, who unhappily addict themselves to it, obseiTes
"I think I should know a person in the streets who has
addicted himself to this vice, by merely walking behind
him, from his peculiar gait." Let not then the victim
af secret vice flatter himself that his unmanly act
escapes detection. It assuredly does not escape the
icrutiny of those accustomed to deal with liuman in-
firmity in all its phases. But, even independent of the
guilty consciousness, tlie preternatural loss of semen
being in fact a loss of the material essential to the con-
Btitution of the manly character, the masculine traits are
gradually weakened, and the alteration pi-oduced
thereby, in every movement of the suHerer, will lead a
skilful medical man so to shape his questions and inves-
tigations as to guide him to the actual fact. Where
Spermatorrhoea has existed for any length of time, not
ouly the aspect of the eyes, but the haggard, careworn
expression of the countenance, arrest attention; the
complexion is umally pale, or of an unhealthy brown
and yellow hue;* the face and nose mostly angular;
the voice becomes effeminate and shrill; the fi-amo
weak and stooping, whilst the dragging step, and the



* In »ome exceptional cascg, however, as explained in th«
Ujxt, tlio bofly continues for a long time plump, and the cold
rudly and 4oeiiiingIy healthy.



Seminal Weakness.



163



shambling walk, show the presence of seme ovenvhelm-
hig cause of prostration and debility. It is not, how-
ever, until the disorder has made considerable ravages
in the constitution that the symptoms become evident
to the uninif'ated.

Peculiarities of this kind must be carefully watched;
for it must be remembered that persons who are afflicted
with diurnal emissions are very generally unaware eveu
of the existence of the inflrmity, and everything must
depend on the physician's keen perception. Nervous
and sedentary patients are apt to experience occasional
jerks or contractions of the muscles of the eye, and
sometimes beams and motes pass flickeringly across the
vision. These aflections, as the disease advances, be-
come aggravated into partial or total blindness.

The sense of hearing is also aflected in very contrary
fashions; sometimes it is dulled, sometimes it appears to
contract a preternatural acuteness or u'ritability, so
that the smallest continuous noise, particularly if of a
jarring kind, produces an annoyance amounting to posi-
tive distress ; singing, whistling, rumbling, and ringing
sounds are occasionally heard ; and the auditory fimc-
tion, like others, may be said to become unnerved.

Taste and smell are aflected, and in some patients
become perverted and depraved. Articles and objecta
which have heretofore given pleasure, grow insipid, or
even disrigreeablo, and things of ciuite a diflerent nature
and flavor are preferred. These latter are symptoms
of frequent, but by no means uniform, occurrence.

The sleep of patients afflicted with Supermatorrhcr.a,
In any, except the earliest stage, may be said to be in all
cases disturbed. Persons iu health go to bed weary and



154



Lifluence of Spermatorrhoea.



rise refreshed. A contrary (■oudition arises during th«
continuance of morbid seminal discharge. It has Ixica
remarlied with much truth, that " the suflercrs get up
more fatigued than wliea they went to bed; their sleep
is light and broken, or, in the other extreme, lethargic;
it is uureli'cshing, and apt to be disturbed by friglitfu)
dreams and nightmares." After these indications fol
low painful sensations in the stomach and intestine s;
and tinally a state of nightly restlessness ensues, during
which the imagination revolves in gloomy images, among
which self-destruction figures foremost. " Days of tor-
por and stupidity follow these restless nights," and a
common feeling is that of weight and heaviness of the
head, and swelling and contiuemeut ol' the brain ; vertigo,
stuttering, heats and Hushes, and other inconveniences,
are among the ordinary accompaniments; wliile in some
cases actual congestion of the brain takes place, which,
if not treated with the utmost vigilance, may have an
immediately fatal tern)ination.

T'lere have not been wanting writers who have con-
tended that not the semen, but only the mucus of the
canal or prostatic fluid, furnishes the discharge in tliese
cases. But this is far from being a correct view of the
pathology ©f the disease ; mere chronic inflammation,
41-ising from common causes, may be accompanied with
fiimple mucous discharge, but Saninal Weakness is, in
the majority of instances, the consequence of self-pohu
lion ; whicli, in the first instance, brings ab( lut that ii-rila
bility ^yhich evinces itself in nocLurnal discliarcjcs, after
wauls in api)recial)lii but exhausting diurnal discharcjes,
and subsccpiently, in complete debility of the whole
generative system. This seminal fluid, such indeed a«



Influence of Spermatorrhoea. 155



Jt is, weak, thin, effete, and devoid of all fructifying
agency, is undoubtedly the fluid which the organs suHfei
to escape ; aud to prevent further its flow, as well as to
give heidlhy tone to the secretory and retentive vt«sels,
ought to form our first care. The shock to the nervous
system, its repeated excitation and disturbance, is net
the only avenue to disease and powerless prostrutiou,
consequent upon loss of the seminal secretion ; for where
the debility is great, and the dribbling loss of thin se-
men, draining involuntarily from irritable vessels, occurs
daily, there is progressive weakness, not referable to
m3re organs, or voluptuous excitement. In fact, as a
popular writer has observed, as the disorder advances,
the penis and testicles become small and relaxed, and
the infirmity might not be inaptly tei med a consump-
tion of those glands. Consequently the causes may be,
at this period, piles or lioemorrhoids, constipation, indi-
gestion, irritability of the bladder or kidneys, &c., &c. ;
for they all, more or less, are present, and, perhaps,
severally aggravate* by stimuli of one kind or other,
taken during the day or previously to rest. Another
occasion may be the loss of tone of the absoi'bents, and
also lo*, of sensibility of the passages through which the
discharge escapes; thereby acting only as somnolent
sentinels to the brain, whereby even the little control
the will might possess, is lost! Thus we perceive tliat
this infirmity is not merely local debility of the genera-
live apparatus, but that other functions of hfe partici-
pate in it.

I might go further, and aflSrm that these continued
seminal discharges of an involuntary character disorder
every function jf the animal economy ; aud it may bo



/



156 I^ects on the Mental Faculties.

added, that whilst Spermatorrhoea produces so many
ruinous effects, iieculiar to itself, it aggravates and ex-
cites any other disease which may exist concomitantly
with it. It possesses this perplexing characteristic, that
no single one of the ordinary remedies of the phar-
macopoeia apply to, or can subdue it whilst it exhibita
the additional difference from other maladies, that here
the vis medicatrix naturoe (nature's healing force, oi
tendency,) does not apply. The tendency of nature, in
most disordcs, is towards cure ; but here, it is towards
deterioration. There is no chance here of the evil
" wearing itself out," save in madness and death on the
one hand, or ou the other, by the salutary intervention
of the most vigorous, cautious, and enlightened treat-
ment, — a treatment pursued in the full light of the aids
afforded by the great discoveries in physiological
science, for which the present age is happily distin-
guished.

But of all the symptoms which bear witness to the
shattering and destructive influence of Spermatorrhoea,
the alteration in the mental faculties is perhaps the most
lamentable, at the same time that it is in general too
little understood, not only by the friends and acquaint-
ances of the persons afflicted, but by the medical ad»
viser. This change is usually indicated, in the early
stages, by perplexity and confusion of ideas ; vacilation
on ordinary occasions, where any simple decision is re-
quired ; a certain degree of hesitation or iucoberency in
Bpealving; and a diiuiuution in the patient's ability to
conccntiate his ideas on any particular topic of study
business, or what not. "Wandering thoughts" rush
into the mind even at the most inopportune times, and



Iiifiuenee of Spermatorrhcea. 157

these thoughts are not always of a pure or innocent de«
BCiiption. The temper becomes peevish, sour, and irri-
table, upon the slightest provocation, or rather upon no
provocation at all. Wlien the sufferer is a married man,
(and I believe tens of thousands on tens of thousands o(
married men are unconsciously in the incipient stages,)
the bitterness of temper consequent on a coxce/VLED
or UNKNOWN CAUSE, is often the source of aggravated
domestic misery. Characters previously cheerful expe-
rience frequent attacks of melancholy and languor ; and
vague fears of some overhanging calamity, which they
cannot define, but still dread, hasten them toward that
depth of depression in which life itself becomes weari-
some. Forgetfulness, confusion of memory, perplexing
comminglement of dates, names, facts, and numbers,
show that the sufferer is approaching a predicament of
mental prostration .in which the most distressing delu-
sions prevail. He imagines enemies among his nearest
friends ; supposes that the whole world is in conspiracy
against his happiness and Ufe ; and with an inconsistency
peculiar to his unhappy condition, contemplates imme-
diate suicide, at the very moment when lie evinces a
ridiculous degree of apprehension about every breath of
air, or other triHiug circumstance which his deluded im-
agination may conjure up as bearing upon his health.

As the symptomatic evidences of the presence of
morbid Spermatorrhcea form the special subject of this
chapter,! will for the present refrain from sketching the
deadly effects of the disorder. Though I have by no
means touched upon every one of the symptoms, I have,
I hope, mentioned enough to apprise readers of ordinary
Intelligence and prudence of the infinite vaiieties of cir*



158 On the Mental Faculties.

cumstaiices in wjiich it is imperatively binding on men,
for the sake of their own happiness, and that of all who
are dear to them, to ascertain whether or not they con-
tain within their system either the acquired or inborn
seeds of an affliction which, in its ultimate stages, has
been but too correctly described as the most fearful,
! degrading, and desperate of human diseases. I cannot
' belter close this chapter than by" referring to the worda
of the celebrated Lallemand, in reference to the delusion
of spontaneous recovery : —

" Many diseases, when left to themselves, work their
own cui-e, provided only they be not exasperated by the
imprudence of the patients. This is not the case with
Spermatorrhtfia, — chiefly, perhaps, because the effect-^
produced by the disease itself are favorable to the in-
crease of involuntary discharges. The natural ten-
dency of this disease to become .aggravated, as the
RESULT OF ITS owjj EFFECTS, frequently leads to a
fatal termination. The patients, under such circum-
stances, generally expire in one of the attacks of syn-
cope that follow congestion of the bram. In this way,
also, such of the insane who have fallen into a state ol
dementia usually expire." After alluding to the fact
that patients li'equently die from diseioses aggravated
and inflamed by unsuspected Spermatorrhoea, he goes
DU to say that the otlier complications usually engross
the attention of the attendants, Spermatorrhoea being
not even thought of, whilst it is committing its ravages,
and reducing the patient to such a state of debility that
ho is unable to withstand other illness. " In such Ciises,
nnfortunalely," concludes M. Lallemand, " Sperma-
[orrhaa ia generally unsuspected."



And Fatal Mistakes.



159



My Oivn observations enable me to con firm the mel-
ancholy truth of this statement. I have cases in my
mind's eye where patients have been pronounced
cachectic, oc as having died of diseased heart, diseased
lungs, &c. ; and where all that I have heard from the
relatives of the deceased parties leaves me no doubt that
the other disorders, whei'e they really existed, might
have been arrested for an indefinite period, had the
morbid uperynatic emission been known either to the
medical attendant or to the patient, or, being known,
been properly treated. But it is, in fact, a neio tiling in
mere routine pathology, to consider the existence of this
disorder at all, though it is the most widely-extended,
the most treacherous, the most destructive and &tal
of aay.



1



1^0 Seminal Debility.



SECTION VI.

8PEBMAT0EEH(EA, OB SEMINAL DEBtLTTY, — CAUSES
AND EFFECTS.

In treating of the pi'imary and ultimate effects of Sper-
matorrhoea, it \s necessary to explain, in order to make
the subject cJ« ar, that some of these effects are so mixed
up, both with the causes and symptoms, as to make it
impossible to describe them, in separate detail, without
overloadiruj the work with so munh purely technical
and scientaic phraseology as to ron'iei it almost unin-
telligiblr to the general reader ; therefore, as this book
is inteiided f.pecially to be ijopidarly and genei-ally
useful, I prefer clothing my descriptions in plain and
simj-Jp language, which will enable persons of ordinary
caj^aci'.y to understand them.

The general importance of the subject it is impossible
to exaggerate. It is moderate to affirm tliat the larger
portion of all the known diseases which, under so
many varieties and inodiflcations, alflict civilized so-
ciety, are connected, in some oilier way or other, with
sexual ailment. The sympathy between the brain, the
spine, and the generative members, ir. both male and
lemale, is so close that eminent p'iysi' ioirists regard
disorder in the former as almost iiif/iviv ,o\y iissociated
with disorder in the latter. Dr. Y u er speaks very



The, Mental and the Generative Machinery. 161

much within the limits of triitli, wlien he states, as the
result of his experience and observation, " that sexual
weal^ness and imperfections constitute the great ma-
jority, — perliaps nine-teuths, — [he might safely have
said jiinety-nine hundredths,] — of the causes of ner-
vous and mental imbecility and derangement." Indeed,
the doctor more nearly describes the real state of the
case whcin he affirms that every insane individual
whether male or female, is at the same time the subject
also of some sort of jjrocreative disability, defect, or
disorder — either impotence or sterility, or both. These
fearful, but wholesome truths, are of an importance
which unfortunately is too often ignored by those medi-
cal men who, from want of industry, want of oppor-
tunity, or on that plea of" want of time," wliich avarice
sometimes appeals to as her excuse for pi-eferring the
pursuit of dollars to the pursuit of professional knowl-
edge, have neglected the study of this great department
of physiology.

Certain it is that as cerebral injuries cause disturl>
ance of the genital system, so, by analogy of conse-
quence, (as proved in innumerable instances,) the in-
jury to the generative organs, and the di-ain of the
nourishing fluid wliich is designed as Nature's great
stay and support, debilitate, paralyse, and ultimately
pervert and destroy the faculties of the mind. In tJia
immensely preponderating majority of cases, where
the remorse arising from the consciousness of self-iu-
«'.urred penalties, — of guilt as well as misery, — is pre-
sent, the evil is, of course, greatly increased ; but leav-
ing out of view, for a moment, the influence of tijis
aggravating incident, it is abundantly certain that the



162 The Menial and the Generative Machinery.

mere loss of the seminal fluid iu immoderate quantities
or tlnciugli any but the sexual orgasm ordained bj
nature, is, per se, ceitaiu to produce, sooner or later,
most disastrous consequences to the reason as well as
to the physique. The semeu itself, let me repeat, is
meant to be the cherisher and nourislier of health and
strength in the whole organization ; to be taken into,
and intermingled with the circulating fluids, and through
these to distribute its invigorating properties all over
the frame. Its healthful retention makes itself evident
in the bright eye, the ingenuous expression, the elastic
step, the intelligent glance, which mark the votary ol
chaste and rational love, as contradistinguished from
the sunken eye, the pinched and haggard lines, the fal-
tering gait, the blotched skin, the anxious, care-worn,
sordid tremulousness, which, to the eye of experience,
betrays the hapless sensualist

It is unnecessary to multiply proofs of the intimate
connection between the mind and the generative
machinery. I may mention, however, the fact, so well
known to almost every adult male, that the obu-usion
of an irrelevant or distributing thought will, even at
the moment when sexual excitement is at its highest
pitch, absolutely preclude liie consummation of the
contemplated act. Nay, in the very act itself, a trivial
accidental interruption, a slight noise, an inopportune
word, wUl produce a temporary suspension of the power
of copulation ; in short, temporary impotence. Exces-
sive ardor, the too eager puisuit of the object, will lead
to the same ellect, which, on the other hand, is equally
induced by the occurrence of any sudden doubt, whether
the oth(-r party in 'he amorous congress be at) pure its



The Menial and the Generative Machinery. 163



had been supposed; whilst the dhectly mechanical
correspondence between two parts ol" the organization
locally distant, but closely associated through the ver-
tebral machinery, is indicated by the fact that at the
awful moment of iguominous death, the shock to tho
l)raiu and nerves produces a rigid erection of the organ
of an executed criminal. Tliis sympatliy is, in fact, au
uniform and inseparable condition iu tlie physical con-
stitution of man.

But though for centuries the physiological axiom has
been recognized that there is a close, inseparable, and
mutually-reacting sympathy between the generative and
the mental organs in the human frame, the Icnowledge
ol' the precise nature of tliat sympathy is of only a few
years' date. The physicians of antiquity observed, in-
deed, that cerebral disease, in any ol' its graver aspects,
whetlier of raving madness, p;issive idiocy, or tlie wast-
ing misery of hypochondriasis, does not exist without
prostration or perversion of the generative faculties ; but
it Wiis reserveil for oiu- own age to discover that tho
former afflictions could not exist without tlie latter; that
the one is, in sliort, the irresistible and certain provoca-
tive of the other.

Among the indicative proofs of this physical truth,
may be noticed the great disproportion of male and
female lunatic patients, whose insanity can be traced
directly to the excesses leading to generative disorders;
tliere is in females a far smaller (comparative) liabihty to
such disorders. Dr. Deslandes remarks that out of 256
individuals admitted into tlie celebrated aayluni ol
Charenton, during the years 1826, 1827, and 1828, the
aumhef of males whose insanity was thus traceable,



164



tipeniuitorrhcea, the Destroyer,



was, to that of females, in the ratio of 15 to 1 ; aud
similar results have been ascertained I'rom varioufl
countries.

How is thi.'- di>iinji;uHioii Lu be accounted for?

By the fact that females are not subject, lilce males, to
the efiects of that devastating pest, so prevalent among
all classes, stations, and ages of the male sex, — viz., In-

VOI.UNTABY SpEKMATOERHCEA.

This terrible affliction is simply an uunatoi-al emis-
sion of the seminal lluid ; and it is well described as ex-
cess! \e spermatic evacuation, from whatever cause pro-
duced, and whether occurring by night or by day. For
nothing should be more constantly remembered by the
pffthologist than that, whilst Spermatorrhoea or seminal
weakness is more evident to ordinary perception, when
occurring in profuse discharges by night, it is still more
insidious, still more destructive in its effects, when il
occurs, imperceptibly, during the day, at stool, at the
emptying of the bladder, and in a variety of other
modes never suspected by a patient, and seldom, imtU
too late, by any medical adviser unpossessed of consum-
mate experience and habits of vigilant observation.

Daily pollutions are, if possible, even more dangerous
than those which occur by night, though the latter have
almost exclusively attracted the attention of caieless
practitioners, many of whoui are, in fact, ignorant of the
very existence and nature of that which is the developed
and most obstinate stage of SpermatorrhcEa. The con-
sequence is, that the cessation of the nightly emissions,
or, rather, their passage into the next and malignant di-
urnal stage. Is frequently unnoticed ; the disorder itsell
Is declared to be cm'ed at the moment when it isproduc-



And its ilillion Victims.



165



ing mortal ravages ; and as it becomes evident, after a
while, tliat some secret malady is still hurrying the pa-
tient to his grave, some new " treatment " is adopted, —
a treatment which, perhaps, is the very reverse of that
which should be applied. Thus mismanaged, misunder-
■stood, misled, by those who undertake to cure him, the
mihappy sufferer is hurried forward, even sometimes
when in comparatively good health, towards debility,
impotence, paralysis, madness, despair, and death.

Such is the I'ate of luicouated myiiads, young and old,
whose bodily disarrangement is aggravated by igno-
hince as to its real nature. And such, it must be added,
is also the fate of multitudes, who, from the insidious-
ness of the disease, and the mildness of its first begin-
ings, never suppose that they are ailing at all, nor fliiuk
of applying to a prol'essional man until the disorder has
attained a degree of virulent strength, such as nothing
can effectually grapple with but that intimate acquaint-
ance with its infinite ramifications, so seldom, alas ! at-
tained by the general run even of those practitioners
who have received legitimate qualifications, and, ol
course, never to be found, even in its first rudimenta,
among the class of charlatans.

In reference to the evil consequences of the ignorance
formerly prevailing on this subject, I take the liberty of
quoting a few lines fiom the work of an English author,
t-o whose researches, sympathising as they do with my
own, I have more than once to acknowledge my obliga-
tions: —

" Both the patients and their medical attendants are
led astray during the most severe periods of the disease
by the diminution or entire cessation of the uigliilj



106



Self-Abme.



pollutions; but diurnal discharges, the effe<)t of which
are much more serious, take their place and become
permanent, complete impoteucy often being the result.
The eflocts ol" nocturnal pollutions are generally sup-
posed to be in proportion to the abundance, frequency,
and energy of the symptoms that precede and accom-
pany them. This, however, is very lalse ; for it is, gen-
erally, when the emissions become less frequent and less
abundant, that '^hey are followed by more serious and
protracted results. This anomaly, ho vever, is more ap-
parent than real, for the nightly now become conjoined
with daily pollutions, which latter likewise escape,
without any sensation, passing off ryith the urine, or
when the patient is at stool, without either his knowl-
edge or observation. It is of imporlAnce, therefore, to
warn such patients of the errors which they are daily
committing, in estimating the importa ice of these night-
ly jDollutions by their abundance and Irequency."

But whence the origin of the sexual disarrangements
alluded to? Let the answer be in the words of a scien-
tific lecturer: — "Constitutional exhaustion and general
enervation and debility, resulting flora premature, in-
temperate, and unnatural venereal excitement, are,
without doubt, by tar the most frequent causes of im
potence and barreimess in both sexes ; this latter per
nicious vice, which can only have been conceived origin-
ally by the imagination of some fiend,* and which, it ia
lamentable to know, is practised in the present day by

* The tlend of ignorance, of negligence, of that fi l»e aail hypo-
critical affectation of fasildiouBiicss, which Is the accrrf^d lo*
prolific fountain of sin and immorality, miglil have biei trHt»>
fully apeciiled by the learned leelurur.



27*6 Victim of Self-A'mse.



107



the youth of both sexes, produces more examples of the
disease in question, than all other causes combined.''
Now, Spermatorrhoea, (in its professional acceptation, the
jivoluntary flowing away of the seed, either by profuse
nt.>cturnal or diurnal discharges, by emission in the
uiine or whilst at stool, or by slow, scarcely perceptible,
or wholly imperceptible " dribbling,") is the secondary
resul*. of unnatural or excessive indulgence, leading
inevitably (unless stayed by the intervention of experi-
ence and science,) to the dreadful consummation so
quaintly but so truthfully depictured in the following
translation fi'om the German of Hufeland: —

"Hideous and frightful is the stamp wliich Natm'e
afilxes on one of this class. He is a faded rose, — a
tree withered in the bud, — a wandering corpse. AH
life and lire are killed by this seci'et cause, and nothing
is left but weakness, inactivity, deadly paleness, wast-
ing of body, and depression of mind. The eye loses ite
lustre and strength, the eye-ball sinks, the features l^e-
come lengthened, the fair appearance of youth departs,
and the face acquires a pale, yellow, leaden tint. The
whole body becomes sickly and morbidly sensitive, the
muscular power is lost, sleep brings no refreshment,
every movement becomes disagreeable, the feet refuse
to carry the body, the hands tremble, pains are felt in
til the limbs, the senses lose theii' power, and all gaiety
is destioyed. Such persons seldom speak, and only
when compelled ; all former activity of mind is destroyed.
Boys, who before showed wit and genius, sink into
mediocrity, or even become blockheads ; the mind losea
its tiiste for all good and lolly ideas, and the imagina-
tion is utterly vitiated. Every glance at a female form



168



The Victim of Self-Abuse.



excites desire. Anxiety, repentance, shanie, and
despair of any remedy for the evil, malvcs the painful
state of such a man complete. His whole life is a series
of secret reproaches, distressing feelings, self-deserved
weakness, indecision, and weariness of life ; and it is
no wonder if the inclination to suicide ultimately
arises, --an inclination to which no man is more pi-one.
The dreadful experience of a living death renders ac-
tual deatli a desirable consummation ; for the waste of
that whicli gives life generally produces disgust and
weariness of life, and leads to that peculiar kind of self-
destruction, pow- Oepitftiom sheer disgust of existence,
which is characteristic of our age. Moreover, the chges-
tive power is destroyed; flatulence and pains in the
stomach create constant annoyance; the blood is
vitiated, the chest obstructed, erui)tions and ulcers break
out upon the skin, the whole body becomes di'ied and
wasted, and in the end come epilepsy, consumption,
slow fever, fainting fits, and an early death."

This description snms up some of the prominent in-
dications which mark the result of long-continued
undue loss of the seminal secretion. Such loss arises
cliieny, as I have already explained, either from
over-fre<; sexual indulgence, (as a comparatively minor
cause,) or from the baneful practice of masturbation,
(the frequent and major cause.) But tliere are in-
stances, it should be observed, where the evil arises
from incidental circumstances, unconnected with either
of those tM'o causes. Cases, where accidents, effects
of climate, congenital defects, or any other of the in-
numerable sources of physical disturbance iini)air, or
Uireateu to impair, the sexual faculties, will at once b«



Self-Abuse.



109



detected and treated by an eflicieut medical advisei , to
whom recourse should be had, on the flrst occunence
of even the most apparently remote reason, for doubt-
ing whether there be ;iny trace whatever of morbid
lesion. For here it is emphatically true that small
things seen grow into great; and the single, isolated.^
tcarcely vidhle "drop" or moisture, detected at stool,
&)• after making water, may, if unnoticed or unchecked,
grow in a short lime into a malady of terrific severity.

Though the funereal eflects of the imdue loss of the
seminal fluid are famUiar to the hitelligence of the medi-
cal man accustomed to deal with such cases, it is neces-
saiy to illustrate them in the most simple and obvious
manner, for the benefit of those, who, wliilst their health
and happiness, — all that can make life desirable, nay,
existence itself, — are at stake, are necessarily una*;-
quainted with the nature of many of those secret influ-
ences, which nothing short of years of obsei-vation,
study, and practice, enables even the physician to mas-
ter in their more recondite relations. It should be
known, then, that in parting with the material of im-
pregnation, the human being parts with a portion of
life itself; and each act of coition, even under the most
legitunate and natural circumstances, involves a degree
of absolute exliaustion, from which the system requires
some time to recover. The perfection to which the
facilities of microscopic diagnosis have been broaght
enables us to ascertain definite liicts in connection with
this subject, of wliich llie practitioners of former times
were ignorant. Some of the most ingenious of them
vaguely conjectured that the imimal semen contained
separate living particles; we, tlieii- successors, ^wt^rtnt^i



t70



Vice, and iti Finale — heath.



know \hat each inlniite drop of tliat fluid consists, wlion
la a licaltliy state, of innumerable living beings, each
of these beings being endowed with the property oj
imparting its life to a future man or woman. Tliis
is no mere theoiy, — it is a demonstrated verity. Separ-
ate tlie semen into tlie most minute atoms wliich dex-
terous manipulation can isolate, and in each of these
Infinitesimal atoms will still exist a multitude of crea-
tures moving about in their little world, and each in-
Bpired with an active and restless vitality, the destined
agent in that mysterious process which, guided by in-
scrutable power, forms a stage in the interminable cycle
of eternity, and developes itself iato the likeness of
Omnipotence.

Returning, however, to the effects of that deva-stating
vice which, unhappily, until comparatively recently, haa
been neglected in somewhat like an inverse ratio of pro-
jjortion to its extent, there are substantial reasons for
believing that, in the lapse of ages, it has swept whole
races and nations off the surface of the earth. To tliis
cause, eminent writers, not confined to those belonging
to the mediciil profession, have attributed the gradual
and incessant process of decay which has so long been
manifest in the condition of the Ottoman empire. To
this has been attributed the state of decrepitude and de-
pravation wliich made the colossal empire of Darius
so easy a prey to the audacious invasion of Alexander
the Great. It was the vice of the ancient Romans, in
the era of their greatest moi-al degradation, turpitude,
uud filthy luxury, immediately previous to the iutrod.ic-
\M>n of Cluistianity,. I liave, by-the-by, whilst acciden-
tally looking over an old file of newspapers, fallen upou



Seminal Losses arising from Self-Abuse. 171

a passage which is curiously illustrative of the subject:
' The diminution of the Mussulman population in
Asia Minor is alarming. Between Tockat and Broussa
I found villages almost eutirely abaudoned by the in-
habitants, in consequence of the severity wilh which
the recruiting for the Nizram, the Turkish regular
troops, is conducted in tliis part oJ' the country. It
would be an inierestuig study to seek out all the causes
which contribute to the dreadful mortality which pre-
vails among the young Turkish soldiers. The food
which is distributed to the gairisons is of sufficiently
good quality, and contagious maladies have been un-
known to Turkey in Europe during the. last five years.
Some European physicians are of tlie opinion that these
young soldiers, not being ■ married, like the ancient
Janissaries, abandon themselves to infamous vices, and
so destroy their own constitutions. But whatever may
be the cause of this immorality, the consequence is the
ever-increasiug weakness of the Turkish empire. The
fact is nowhere more perceptible than in the inteiior of
Asia Minor, whence the great number of conscripts are
drawn to Constantinople. At present, several extensive
villages are to be seen in Anatolia from which all the
young men have been withdrawn. This remarkable
circumstance has not escaped the Khoord chiefs of the
neighborhood, who, from the tops of their mountains,
regard with profound attention the decay of the Otto-
man Empire."

It would be a painful thiug to enumerate the list of
maladies which arise from the practices to which tliis
paragraph refers. In our own country, as abroad, they
*re most fearful, and are confined to no class or section



Seminal Losses,



of the community. A moment's consideration will
suggest liow necessarily an excessive and contimoua
• drain of ^^le most invigorating fluid contained in ilio
sy.stera, must lead to prostration and decline. That fluid,
be it recollected, is not simply an excremenlitious ma-
terial, intended to be voided like other matters which
nature expels from the body, — it is intended to be re-
tained therein, with the exception of the comparatively
small portion which may be healthfully employed from
time to time in the coDSummation of the nuptial rites.
An idea may be formed of the nature of this loss, and of
the sacred guard which health imposes on its due pre-
servation, by observation of the consequences resulting
from its unnecessary, involuntary, or too frecpient
evacuation. Physicians in all ages have been of opin-
ion that the loss of one ounce of semen, by self-abuse,
nocturnal emission, or at stool, injures the system more
completely than the abstraction of forty ounces of blood.

Hippocrates observed that " the seetZ of man arose
from all the lunnors of his body, and is the most valua-
ble part of them." When a person loses it, (he says
in another place,) he loses the vital spirit; so that it is
not astonishing that its too frequent evacuation sliould
enervate, as the body is thereby deprived o( thepurest oi
its humors. Another autlior remarks that " the semen is
kept in the seed vessels until Uie man makes proper
use of it, or nocturnal emissions deprive him of it. Dur-
ing all this time, the quantity which is there dclaincil
excites Iiim to the act of venery ; but the greater: [Ku i
of this essence, which is the most volatile and odorifer-
ous, as well as the strongest, is absorbed into the blood,
and it there produces upon its return, very great changes.



Arising from Self-Abuse.



17S



It makes thti beard, hair, and uails grow; it changes
the voice and manners; for age does not produce
these changes in animals, it is the seed only that ojier-
ales in this manner, for these changes are never mei
with in eunuchs, or those m'Iio have been deprived ol
their testicles. Can a greater proof of its vitalizing
power be shown, than the fact that one single drop is
sufficient (under proper circumstances,) to give life to
a fuiure being?" Those, then, who waste tliis precious
fluid are ti uly ^Tetched. Disabled from rendering any
service eitlier to themselves or their iViends, they drag
on a life totally useless to others, and a burden to them-
selves, in the midst of that society which, if it could
know, would despise, rather than pity them for their
Belf-iufiicted sufl'erings. The mortdist and legislator
will do well, in estimating the sources of human wetch-
edness, mental perversity and crime, to talce into ac-
count those habits wliich tend not more to enfeeble the
physical constitution of man than to demoralise his
springs of action.

It is essential to take notice that the cause which
leads to tlie distressing and fatal symptoms, mental and
bodily, described, is sympathetic with the presence of
the morbid spermatic discharge which continues in-
voluntarily, sometimes imperceptibly, but continuously
and persistently, long after the vice which originally in-
duced it has been abandoned, and hunies the victim to
an untimely grave, unless by a fortunate discovery of
tlie precipice on whose brink Ijp totters, the helping baud
of skill be invoked to his relief and rescue.

In order to corroborate my own statements, I will
here introiuce an extract from a licport on the subject



174



Sdf-Ahuse.



of Idiocy and Insanity presented to the Massachusetts
Senate by Dr. S. G. Howe, in compliance with a former
resoliiliou of that body directing such a Report to to
made.

Dr. Howe mal<es the following forcible remarks :
" There is another vice, a monster so hideous in mien
so disgusting in feature, altogether so beastly and loath-
some, that, in very shame and cowardice, it hides its
head by day, and vampyre-like, sucks the very life-blood
from its victims by night ; and it may perhaps commit
more direct ravages upon the strength and reason of
those victims than even intemperance ; and that vice is

SELF-ABUSE.

" One would fain be spared the sickening task of deal-
ing with this disgusting subject; but, as he who would
exterminate the wild beasts that ravage his fields must
not fear to enter their dark and noisome dens, and drag
them out of their lair; so he who woidd rid humanity
of a pest must not shrink from dragging it from its
hiding-places, to perish in the light of day. If men de-
ified him wlio delivered Lerna from its hydra, and can-
onized him who delivered Ireland of its serpents, whnt
should tliey do for one who could extiqjate this monster
vice ? What is the ravage of fields, tiie slaughter of
flocks, or even the poison of serpents, compared willi
that pollution of body and soul, that utter extinction
of reason, and that degradayon of beings made in G >d's
image to a condition which it would be an insult to the
animals to call beastly, and which is so often the ecu
sequence of excessive iudulgence in this vice?



Helf-Ahuse.



175



" It canuot be that such loathsome wrecks of liniuanity
fts men and women reduced to dnvelling idiocy by tliis
cause, should be permitted to float upon tlie tide of lil'e,
without some useful purpose ; and the only one we can
conceive, is that of awful beacons to malve otliers
avoid, — as they would eschew moral pollutioa and
death, — the course which leads to such ruin.

" Tliis may seem to be extravagant language, but
tliere can be no exaggeration, for there can be no ade-
quate description even, of the horrible condition to which
men and women are reduced by this practice. There
are, among those enumerated in this Report, some who
were considered young gentlemen and ladies, but who
are now moping idiots, idiots of the lowest kind ; lost
to all rea^5on, — to all moral sense, — to all shame ; idiots
who have but one thought, one wish, one psission, — and
that is, the fui ther indulgence in the habit which has
loosed the silver cord even in their early youth, which
has already wasted, and, as it were, dissolved the fibrous
part of their bodies, and utterly extinguished their
minds.

" In such extreme cases there is nothing left to appeal
to, absolutely less llian there is in the dogs and horses, —
for they may be acted upon by fear of punishment; but
these poor creatures ai-e beyond all fear and all hope,
and they cumber the earth a while, living masses of cor-
ruption.

" If only such lost and helpless wretches existed, it
would be a duty to cover them charitably with the veil
of concealment, and liide them from the public eye, aa
things too hideous to be seen ; but, ahis I they are only
the most unfortunate members of a large chiss. Thej



Self-Abuse.



have sunk down into tlie abyss towards which thousands
are tending. The vice which liaa shorn these poor
creatures of tlie" fairest attributes of humanity is acting
upon otliers, in a less degree indeed, but still most inju-
riously; enervating the body, weakening the mind and
polluting tlie soul.

" A knowledge of the extent to which this vice pre-
vails, would astonish and shock many. It is indeed a
pestilence that walketh in darkness, because, while it
saps and weakens all the higher qualities of the mind,
it so strengthens low cunning and deceit that the victim
goes on in his habit unsuspectei', ':util he is arrested oy
some one whose practiced eye reads his sin in the very
means which he takes to conceal it, — or until all sense
of shame is Ibrever lost in che night of idiocy with
which his day so early closes.

" Many a child who coafldes everything else to a
loving parent, conceals ■this practice in its innermost
heart. The sons or daughters who dutifully, conscien-
tiously, and religiously confess themselves to father,
mother, or pi'iest, on every other subject, never allude to
this. Nay, they try to cheat and deceive by false ap-
pearances; for, as against this darling sin, — duty, con
science, and religion are all nothing. They even think
to cheat God, or cheat themselves into the belief that
He who is of j>urer eyes tliau to behold iniquity can still
regard their sin with favor.

" Many a fond parent looks with wondering anxiety
upon the puny frame, the I'ecble purpose, the fitful hu-
mors of a dear child, and, after n-ying all other remedies
to restore him to vigor of l>oay and vigor of mind, goes
jourucying about iVou j «iCo to place, hoping to leavs



Self-Abuse.



177



the offending cause behind, while tlie victim hugs the
disgusting serpent closely in his bosom, and conceals it
careFiiUy in Ms vestment.

" The evils which tliis sinful habit works in a direct
and positive manner are not so appreciable, perhaps, as
that wliich it aflects iu a direct and negative way. For
one viciim which it leads down into the deptJis of idiocy,
there are scores and hundreds whom it makes shame-
faced, languid, irresolute and inefficient for any hUjh
purpose of life. In this way, the e\'il to individuals and
to the community is vci-y great.

"It behooves every parent, especially those whose
childi'en (of either sex) are obliged to boai'd and sleep
with other children, whether in boarding-schools, board-
ing-houses, or elsewhere, to have a constant and watch-
ful eye over them with a view to this insidious and per-
nicious habit. The symptoms of it are easily learned,
and, if once seen, should be immediately "oticed.

" Nothing is more false than the common doctrine
of delicacy and resei-ve in the treatment of this habit.
All hints, all indirect ad\ice, all attempts to cure it by
creating diversions, will generally do nothing but in-
crease the cuiming with wliich it is concealed. The
way is, to throw aside all reserve ; to charge the olfence
ilirectly home; to show up its disgusting natm'e and
hideous consequences in glowing colors; to apply the
cautery seething hot and press it in to the very quick,
unsparingly and unceasingly.

" There need be no fear of weakening virtue by let-
ting it look upon such hideous deformity as this vice
presents. Virtue is not salt or sugar lo be softened by
*uch exposm-e ; but the crystal or diamond that rcpele



«



t

178 Self-Almse.



all foulness from its surface. Acquaintance with such
a vice as this, — such acquaintance, that is, as is gained
by having it held up before the eyes in all its ugliness,
can only serve to make it detested and avoided.

"Were this the place to show the utter fallacy ol
the notion that harm is done by talking or writing to
the young about this vice, it could probably be done by
argument, certainly by the relation of a pretty exten-
sive experience. This experience has shown that in
ninety-nhie cases in a hundred, the existence of the vice
was known to the young, but not known in its true
deformity; and that, in the hundredth, the repulsive
character in whicli it was first presented, made it cei'tain
that no further acquaintance with it would be sought.''

This is speaking to the point, and Dr. Howe nevei
rendered more important service to sutlering humanity
than when he laid down these momentous trutlis.

In another part of the Report the eflects of ignoranct
are made terribly apparent, not only upon the unfortu-
nate victim, but also upon society at hirge, and it is
plainly shown what danger every one runs while tlial
ignorance exists.

" In some families which are degraded by drunken-
ness and vice, taere is a degree of combintid ignorance
and depravity which disgraces humanity. It is not
(vonderful that feeble-minded children are born in suci
families ; or, being born, that many of them become
idiotic. Out of tl4s class domestics arc sometimes taken
by those in better circumstances, and they make theii
employers feel the consequences of suffering ignorance
and vice to exist in tlie community. There are ciu^es
recorded in the appendix, where servant-women, who



179



had the charge of little girls, deliberately taught them
uabi'^s of self-abuse, in order that they Ki,'ght exhaust
themselves and go to sleep quietly I This Ujs happened
in private houses as well as in the almuhouses; and
such little girls have become idiotic !

" The mind instinctively recoils from giving credit to
such atrocious guilt ; nevertheless, it is there with all ita
hideous consequences ; and no hiding of our eyes, no
wearing of rose-colored spectacles, — nothing but look-
ing at it in its naked deformity, will ever enable men to
cure it. There is no cordon sanitarie for vice ; we can-
not put it into quarantine, nor shut it up in a hospital;
if we allow its existence in our neighborhood, it poisons
the very air which our children breathe."

In preceding and subsequent chapters, ^especially in
those which treat of the result of persoual examina-
tions,) I introduce some curious and impok-tant particu-
lars relative to the condition of healtliful, unvitiated
semen, when not weakened, corrupted, empoisoned by
aberrations from the saci'ed ordinances of nature,
Wlien her rules are disregarded, the fluid becomes
decomposed, and its living inhabitants mere aggi-ega-
tions of disorder. In the discharge which takes place
from the organs of persons who have habituated them-
selves to improper practices, or who have been suffering
for any length of time, — perhaps unconsciously, —
fiom morbid emissions, the spermatozoa (a.s the animal-
culie in question are professionally designated) on
found in a dineafied, mutilated condition, full ofmalig
nily and h-ritation, instead of being germs of vitality
But, as even when in tiiis diseased state, there ik
»b8orl)ed in their construction as much of the strength



180



Self Abuse.



ening juices of the fiame as iu that of the vigorous
aniiiialculas in healthy semen, their emission from the
system creates a waste equally great, but which the ir;-
cessant debilitation of his body renders the victim, day
after day, less and less able to endure. Meanwhile tlie
evil proceeds in a duplicate process of aggr ivation. As
the system becomes less capable of enduring any drain
whatever, the drain itself becomes greater, not only re-
latively but absolutely, and the progress to utter pros-
tration is precipitated with mortal, unrelenting, re-
tributive severity. Truly, terribly, in such cases, the
curse of sin " comes home to roost."

In the early stage of seminal weakness, different per-
sons are variously affected : some are incajjahlc of pro-
curing a dificharge of semen into the cavity of the
female genitals in a natural way, though they may
effect temporary erection ; whilst others cannot per-
form the act of copulation, from emission taking plate
too quickly, and before the proper firmness of the male
organ has enabled it to effect the requisite penetration.
What man, possessing the ordinary capal/ilities of a
man, can contemplate without a shudder, those terrible
consequences of self-indulgence! The nuptial bed of
such an one, instead of teeming with a hallowed, ecsta-
tic and transporting delight, is converted into a scene
of blended mortification, disgust, cUsappointment, and
suppressed anger; and it is now that the mistaken
bride is made to feel herself the victim of previous sen-
enality, — the poor, deceived last hope of \igor, —
anxious for offspring, yet baffled from day to day, hi
the arms of the man she has vowed at the ;iltar to
k)ve and honor. And he, conscious of the (;ause of his



Self-Abuse.



181



mflrmily; the dark secret smouldering In his breast,
galliug his wretched existence, and not to be imparted
even to the wife of his bosom! If, under such circurp-
Btances, (nature roused by repeated and fruitless efforts,)
the unlbrtunate female falls a prey to some vil'"! seducer,
exulting in tlie full strength of manhood, her offence is
not altogether without palliation, and the liusband may
well, yet painfully, accuse himself as the cause of her
unhappy deviation. A youth devoted to the practice
of self-pollution is led to form a matimonial ronnection.
He is called upon to exchange his abhorred propensity
for the natural enjoyments of the marriage bed. How
forlorn is then the predicament of both individuals '
The husband, perhaps, experiencing an ex'citation of
a new, but extremely powerful description, essays to
fulfil the chief end of their union. Piission lights up
a momentary flame, every faculty tremliliugly alive to
the impress of a new stimulus: he attempts the sexual
act, a spontaneous emission occurs, the exr.itement re-
tires, his lively emotions become palsied, and his animal
organization is now utterly incompetent to manly or
vigorous effort, — a mere inanimate helpless mockery
Df all that woman delights to idolize, whose very
vehemence, if not courted, is naturally expected.

The various effects that urethi-al discharges hav«
upon the animal friwne, depend greatly on the influence
they have on the mind. In most, nocturnal emissions
lay the foundation of seminal weakness and gleet, and
ciuses occur where tlie system, having labored under the
influence of morbid emissions, feels more powcrfidly
than others, all that nervous irritation which usuallj?
accomp.'inics a profuse dibcharge of tlie semen; provipf



1h2



Seminal Weakness



beyond doubt "Jie existence of chronic deliHty. F'»i
wnat has less eflTect on one constitution prodiicej"
symptoms in another extremely harrassing to lx)th the
bvxiy and mind; and thus a complex derangement
aklses, the combined result of a concatenation of events
that may be traced, even with mathematical precision,
U, this debilitating cause : for we are led to infer that
sfcfflinal weakness precedes this nervous derangement;
jtud to me it is evident that when nervous debility
exists, the seminal discharges are increased; and the
repetition of them unquestionably weakens the vital
enwrgy, and after an indefinite period, predisposes the
Ben.^ibility of tlfe cerebral organ to morbid irritation.
Thus, from intercourse with the nerves, the general
system is disturbed, and body and mind rendered sus-
ceptible to the caprice of that vicissitude of irritation,
whose ualversality of influence can only be described
by those who have felt its agency. Nor is the effect
of this influeiice the offspring of a fervid or depressed
imagination ; o>i the contrary, a class of painful and
distressing disea.'ses are originated, which, in their pro-
gress, have a great effect on organization; and this
morbid irritability more frequently attends on consti-
tutions previously debilitated by venereal excesses, or,
more frequently still, by the baneful habit of Onanism,
through which the parts are not only so weakened, but
are also rendered so irritable, and so easily, from habit,
exciled by mental influences that the slightest stimulus
Is suflicient to call them into action, and tliereby
produce a discharge of semen.

In some instances, the power of the male genitals ia
not altogether destroyed ; nay, impregnation may occur



And Sexual Impotence.



In a he<a]thy female, from the laborious emliraces of w
wliose coiiStitutioiii.J vigor is almost entirely destroyed.
But the oflspring, — can it be rationally expected that
the child of such a fotlier should be otherwise than
puny, feeble, and predisposed to those diseases, which,
under the most favorable circumstances, destroy so lai'ge
a proportion of children under live years of age ? We
know that there are diseases peculiar to childhood.
The process of dentition is accompanied by much
irritation, and sweeps annually its thousands into th«
grave. Measles, hooping cough, croup, and, most espe-
cially, inflammatory affections of the lungs and mucous
membranes of the bronchial cavities, form the sad
catalogue of evils through which, as through an armed
troop, the poor little sufferers are doomed to run the
gauntlet, and only the minority pass the ordeal.

Is constitutional vigor of no importance in enabling
children to resist harmlessly the certain attacks of those
diseases to which they arc peculiarly liable ? The sem-
inal secretion, which in a certain sense communicates
life, or is at least the agent, without wlilch the embry-
otic rudiments of a new being cannot assume active
and progi'essive vitality, is itself alive; and if from ex-
cessive evacuation of this fluid, seminal weakness ensue,
it is not unreasonable, but highly philosophical, to sup-
pose, that in the event of procreation occurring from
actual sexual congress, the offspring will bear enstamped
upon it the physical charactci-s derivable from parental
d(!bility. As illustrative of the truth of this position, 1
may observe, that from the daysof Aiistotle, it has been
remarkad that illegitimate children are frequently en-
dowed with great genius and valor ; and both ancieut



184



Seminal Weakness



and modern hi.story certainly affords many such exam
pies. Tlie circumstance has been commonly ascribed to
the wvpeLuosdy of both parents during their embraces.
Ilercules, Romulus, Alexander, Themistocles, Jugur-
tha, King Arthur, William the Conqueror, Homer, De-
mosthenes, and many others, were illegitimate; and iu
nlmost every kingdom the most eminent families have
.5prmiglxom the left-handed oflspring of princes. The
svorthiest captains, best wits, greatest scholars, bravest
»pirit3 in English annals, have been base-born. Cardan,
m his " Subtleties," gives a reason, — " These are more
aoble and powerful in body and mind, chiefly fi-om the
rehemence of the sexual act that begat them." Proba-
bly their superior energy may be attributed to the
BtrengUi of parental constitution, which is all for which
I contend, the weak and delicate not being so likely to
become the prey of unlawful and forbidden fove.

If these positions be correct, and who so hai'dy as to
Hnpngn their accui'acy, founded most evidently on the
cornraon-sense observation of mankind? — it follows
that there may be, and are, varieties of Seminal Weak-
ness (originating most commonly, il* not exclusively, in
sensual excess, and esjjecially in self-pollution,} whicli,
though not absolutely precluding the performance oj
the sexual act, may render that act unfruitful, or ter-
minate in the production of progeny to whom a sickly
short-lived existence is rather a curse than a blessing.
Born only to rouse the sensibilities of maternal fond-
uess - -

I<'or us they sicken, and for us they die.
Forgor,«;ii indiscretions, the sins of early youth, flit io



And Sexual Impotence.



bitter recollection athwart the keenly sensitive con-
acicnce : the poor iinconscions babe, upon whose imio-
cent smile love had riveted its tender fetters, in the
mean time sleeps well ; the flowers that deck its coffin
are only flowers ; but there is one to whose awakened
lieart those simple memorials are as keen as the blade
of a polislied dagger.

The term Impotence is applied as relative to that •
inability or incapacity to the performance of the sexual
act, which may arise from a variety of causes, but from
none so frequently as from excesses of Seusuahsm, more
especially the secret, vicious, and solitary indulgences of
self-pollution. It is impoi"taut, in a practical point of
view, that we do not confound this condition of the
generative system with Sterility, inasmuch as a male
who is sterile, or a barren female, may possess a perfect
aptitude for coition, though for all the purposes of pro-
creation absolutely incapable. In impotence there is a
temporary or permanent destruction of those powers
which are absolutely essential for generative purposes.
Sterility may therefore be defined as inability to propor
gate the species, though not to eflect the sexual con-
gress ; while Impotency, in either sex, whether natural
or acquired, whether as the result of disease or mal-
formation, entirely precludes its performance. Impo-
tence, resulting from physical imperfection of the sexual
organs, is mostly incurable; but when originating in
such disorders of the urinary or genital apparatus a.s ara
traceable to irritation or inflanunation of those struc-
tures, or to conditions however pi-oduced, thence re-
sulting, such as thickening of the l)ladder, enlargement
of the prostate gland or testicles, wasting of the penis.



180



Seminal Weakness



especially long-continued gleets and strictures, qui first
ellbi'ts are naturally directed to tLe removal of thosa
proximate causes of the affliction ; and if the habit be
still indulged, to the baneful, ultimate, or immary causo
of so severe a deprivation. If uuder these circuni-
slances Natui-e does not readily re-assume her wonted
functions, if there be remaining debility, it is necessary lo
invigorate the frame by the employment, not mci'ely of
Ihose diirnsible stimuli which act generally upon the
whole system, but by the administration of remedies
which are known to act immediately upon the genera-
tive parts. If excessive irritability be piesent, it is
necessary to employ such remedies as tend to diminish
Irritation in the morbidly sensitive organs.

The causes of Impotence in man arise fi'om two
sources, — from vicious malformation of the genitals, or
want of power; but among women. Impotence can only
dejjend on malformation, either natural or acquired.
These causes are more commonly observed iu man than
in the other sex, and this is easily accounted for by the
gi^eatcr part the male has to perform in the nuptial
congress. This is evident from the phenomena which
gave the virile member the form and disposition proper
for erection, the introduction of the organ, and the ejac-
ulation of the semen, which are eflectcd by a violent
and complicated action, requiring a concurrence cl
many indispensable conditions, the organs not only
contracting spasmodically, to elfect the expulsion of tl^o
male fluid, but all the body participating at this inoinci (
in a strange convulsion, as though naturis at the in^l n.t
forgot every other function. It will 1)C obvious (hat ihr
treatment must admit of wide muditlcation, an hn\w



And Sexual Impotence.



187



tence mpy oe absolute or relative, constitutional or
local, direct or indirect, transient or apparantlij per-
tnanmt. Miuiy defects of coiifoi'iniition are sufficient
more or leps completely, to interfere with the sexual
del: among men, preternatural length, closure, or ail-
hesiun of the foreskin, constituting 7)/t//mosis, wliich may
be either congenital or the result of disease. Cancerous
or schirrous enlargem^int of the prostate is fre(iuent in
advanced life, and forms another obvious physical bar
to copulation. Among females, adhesion of the sides of
the vagina is not so common as an imperforate state of
the hymen, wMch rccasionaliy so completely closes the
entrance to the internal organs that the mensti'ual se-
cretion has been known to accumulate behind that
membrane, and for want of the natural outlet, thu
cavity of the womb has naturally assumed a distension
closely resembr.ng that of pregnancy. Some, from con-
stitutional frigidity, are impotent; thus we read that
Zenobia, Queen of Palmyra, only admitted her hus-
band's embraces once a month, and then solely in rela-
tion to posterity. It is doubtful whether under such
circumstances her sense of duty would make up for
the absence of inclination. Excessive venery, and the
profuse discharges ofjluor alhus or the whites, are sus-
ceptible of completely destroying all power of excite-
ment in women ; hence prostitutes, from overstimulation
of tiie generative organs, seldom conceive. Transient
impotence is often the result of mere apprehension.
Too eager desires, to ardent imaginations, the ecstatic
eflect produced by the sight of a beloved object, extreme
nervous susceptibility, are sometimes sufflciei.t to pro-
duce temporary impotence.



188



Impotence and Sterility.



It Is not unusual to meet with instances of married
people becoming quite indifferent to eacK other's em-
braces. A patient of mine confessed to me his inability
to complete the sexual act with his wile, unless, by ul
effort of the fancy, imagination conjured up the form
ol some more voluptuous female. Physical defect may
constitule the cause of impotence, but more frequentls
there is neither organic defect nor local disease; the
allection is a mere nervous suspension of power, wliich
is soon removed under proper management. Even
this has its wise ordination. Any individual, however
vigorous in his physical capacity, if he anticipates)
with too intense eagerness, intercourse with a beloved
object, will seldom perform the act well. Even among
the most ardent and powerful, it occurs, as many have
confessed, hat after waiting time after time for oppoi-
lunity, when that has arrived, they have not had the
power to take advantage of it; a nervous anxiety, a
tremulous delight absolutely indefinable, has completely
prostrated all power, and the object of passion has been
eaved from perdition by its paralysing all the lire and
Ardency of animal desire. If the imagination wanders
fl'om the task, temporary impotence is the result; and
.Qany writers are firmly of opinion that impregnation is
ollen impeded by the presence of ideas which interfere
with the due performance of the generative act. Sterne
jas happily commented on this point in one of his most
jopular works, introducing his maternal parent as ask-
Aig, a.l a mofit untimely inomenl. whether his " fathei
had not forgotten to wind up the clock." Wis views
are strictly physiological. Such is the power of t)i«
inoiai ovc'r the physical state of man!



4



Iiiipotenr.e and tilcrility. 189

Many impotent persons are cured by quieting the
iuiagiuatioii and strength'ening tlie constituliou, by in-
vigorating the general health and the genitiU organ"
Wo are aequaiuted with no finieLion of the animal
nHiehanism so specially dependent upon the mind as
this; I'or though sexual Intercourse be a compound act
o/ the body and the mind, its essential energy, its pecu-
liar stimuli, proceed from the mind ; tind according to
Ihn exciting energy of the mind is the act performed.
Thus, from a compound act of indescribable pleasure
' and languor, organic beings are endowed with power
to produce others similar to themselves; or rather, let
me add, an essential part of themselves is separated in
the act, the power of that sepiuation being concentrated
in the generative organs. The moment the semen has
passed, from the greater exertion used by the male,
langour and depression succeed; and at this period
his ofllce is complete, and a new and complicated ar-
rangement takes place in the female; but what the
character of the arrangement is, which actually occurs
within the female uterus, after exptw ienciug the most
delightful and exquisite of all sensual pleasures, being
properly impregnated, and on the eve of giving form
and existence to her offspring, we yet know not.

Impotence in the male may arise, then, from a wide
diversity of conditions : Incapacity of erection, gene-
rally referable to self-pollution; impotence, ensuing
Q'om a wiint of power of retention in the sennnal ves-
sels, induced by a morbid susceptibility in those vessels,
4nd brought about in like niamier ijy a persistence in
the same vicious practice; impotence, from inubilily of
etention resulting from repletion of the vess(!ls — all



190



Impotence and Sterility.



d(;iii;iiid a variety of treatment peculiar to tlu pieclsfl
coiulilion of the parts. Impotence from mental in-
fluence has also its appropriate management Exclu-
sive of this, the generative infirmity under considera-
tion, though occasionally arising from simple disetise, is
ascribable in by far the greater majority of instances
to the excesses of Sensualism, either with women, or
more commonly still, i)i that vile excess to which such
frequent allusion has been made in these pages. Long-
protracted chastity or continence is not to be overlooked
as a cause of impotence. The very reverse of the
degrading habit of self-pollution, it is not only compar-
atively rare, but offers in its very nature the indications
of cure. But that long-continued debauchery, whether
with women or by masturbation, is to be assigned as
the most common and prominent of the causes of Im-
potence, is a fact admitted by all systematic writere,
and amply and painfully confirmed by my own expe-
rience. Mons. Pinel observes, " Tlie Impotence caused
by the latter is too often Incurable^ Fortunatelv, the
records of a numerous list ot cases prove that recovery
of the powers of manhood is not (under judicious m-an-
agement.) so altogether hopeless as might seem to be
the fact, trusting only to the observation of those medi-
cal men who have not made these subjects their pecu-
liar and exclusive study.

Impotence, then, is chiefly caused by the debility of
the genital organs, induced by precocious venereal
tnjoyinents, or by the unrestrained abuse of the delicate
structures in any method that (ends to produce re-
peated and severe evacuations of the seminal fluid. It
imjot«nce result fi-om sell-pollution, there w a want oj



Impotence and Sterility. 191



erection, and should a semiual emission tidve place, the
semen does not possess its proliHc power, and thus Uie
man is at once impotknt and steuile. This Ibrni of
uiipotence is truly deplorable, and, unlortunately, it is
ihe most prevalent variety. Nevei'theless, / have suc-
ceeded in curing many persons laboring under this
•omplication, although several involuntary diurnal, aa
veil as nocturnal, emissions have regularly occuried
without amorous impulse. Next to Self-pulUiiion, ex-
cessive VENEBY is a Irequent cause of im[)otence,
as well as of sterility among the male sex. 27its is a
frequent cause of want of offspring in young married
persons. In these cases the semen may escape without
the aid of the ejaculatory muscles, is imperfect in
quality, and devoid of poAver until the health be im-
proved ; or if impregnation ensue, the child luidoubtedly
partakes of the debility of the parent, soon to be con-
signed to a premature grave, the victim of that name-
less atrophy or wasting decay which hurries thousands
of infants aniuially to the tomb. In these cases the
male parent sutlers from inllannnation of the seminal
vesicles, or there is a seminal weakness, with more or
less involuntary discharge.

The surest means by which sound and vigorous child-
ren may be engendered, is a good constitution, anen-
leebled by excessive wiiste of those powers which, in
tlieir assemblage, constitute the manifestation of the
living principle. It is admitted, not merely by all i)hi-
losophic writers who have specidated deeply upon the
huitject, but by all who have paid the least attention to
tile facts comiected with such a statement, that not
lueiely the physiwd but the moral dispositicus of the



102



Impotence and Sterility,



parent are transitiittecl by generation; hence, if t
sound mind, in a sound body, be the first, greatest, and
most lasting blessing, and its deprivation or absence tlie
gnaatest possil)le ciu-se, how imperatively necessary la
the obligation to calculate closely tlie tendency of vicious
Indulgences, to avoid the contamination of depraved
nabits, and to coi rcct and elude the consequences of
tiiat debility, already imposed upon the generative or-
gans by sensual excess ! Impotence and Stekility
are usually the result of wilful imprudence. Malforma-
tion is a direct interposition of creative wisdom; its oc-
currence is comparatively rare; but failing power is not
only exceedingly common, but generally constitutes a
self-inflicted evil. Diseased and delicate parents procre-
ate diseased and wealcly offspring. The same resiUts
arc observed in plants and animals. Can it be supposed
that the physicd powers, the sympathies, of a beautiful
woman of an excellent constitution are in unison with
those of a man whose best energies were long ago ex-
pended in the premature and illicit excesses of lawless
excitement, whose youth has been a hm-ried liistory
of wild enjoyment, whose faculties have been lashed
past, the natural powers of his bodily organization, and
who now brings his decrepit eflbrts as a worthless offer-
ing at the shrine of matrimonial sanctity? Or worse
still, is there a mockery more deep, moi'e bitter, than
tliat desolation of spirit which an affectionate woman
must feel on finding she clasps entwined within her cir-
cling embrace the mere wreck of sensualism, the horri-
ble victim of Fclf-poIIution ; the creature who, having
trained his imagination and bodily powers to mere fan-
cied enjoyments, is now deprived almost, if not entirely,



0



As Ejects of Self-Abuse. 193

of the capability of resuming tlie action for wliich iiia
geaorative organs were destined? Woman's scorn must
be the more intense, because, from the very natme of
her own. position, she is precluded from giving vent to
ner feelmgs of anger and vexation. Love cannot be re-
ciprocal in such cases; animal or organic impulse will
prefer that which is more accordant with itself; even
beasts prefer males which are possessed of vigor, power,
and beauty, and this instinct is implanted by nature in
all animals. Wliatever perversion civilization may effect
in our feelings or manners, it cannot extinguish this in-
stinct. And this is an eminently wise ordinance, tending
to the perpetuity of a healthy race of human beiugs.

If Sensualism has impaired the powers, not of both
parents, but of one only, the punishment of the offence
is either Sterility or debility; or pain, disease, and
death ti-ansmitted to the children, and reflected back
with sorrow upon the parents. Impotence, then, is the
last crowning scourge of sexual imijerfection, and de-
mands for its removal the most cautious application of
the resources of the healing art. The treatment of the
clu'onic diseases of the generative system has been
Blrangely neglected and signally misunderstood. The
efficacy of well-directed efforts has been much mis-
trusted in this mattei-, and it is remarkable that both the
patient and the practitioner contribute to these impedi-
ments ; for as the latter Jias been accustomed to see his
remedies speedy in theu* effects, he is himself discom--
aged if they do not immediately produce the desired
benedt. Nor is it any wonder that the patient becomes
uicredulous of the promised relief, — neither of them
recollecting that tlie morbid states have been slowly



194 Impotence and Sterility,

produced, and cannot, therefore, be speedily clianged
SeU'-pollutioji, the frequent cause of sexual impotence
and sterility, is generally the habit of the best years oJ
youthful life ; and its deadening impress often tells with
deplorable certainty, long after the baneful habit h;i3
been relinquished. Time must, therefore, be aflbrded
for the rectification ot that artiiiciid state into which the
powers of the system have been wantonly pkmged. It
-s evidently the absence of tixed principles in our path-
ology of the slow diseases of the generative system,
that has given such unbridled license to quackery.
There hiis always existed a vagueness of opinion respect-
ing their nature, and an ini.settled doctrine as to the
most rational methods to be adopted for their mitigation
and cure. The communication of disordered action is
an inevitable result of indulgence in any mode of
Sensualism, either excessive, or coiftrary to the order of
nature and the constitution of our being; and the char-
acter of that perverted action maybe readily anticipatea.
In fact, we see it exemplified in the excessive irritability
of the bladder and seminal vessels, producing incapabil-
ity for retention, disease of the spinal marrow and brain,
Bpasm of the urethea and strict lu-e, or an efleminata
flaccidity of the penis, testicles, and scrotum. Can it
be expected that these organs should be capable, under
Buch circumstances, of fuUlUing then* appropriate olHce
in the task of procreation? Most iissuredly not. WJiere
Impotence is consequent upon that baneful propensity
which cannot be sufficiently stigmatized, its extent oJ
severity is far (/renter than ivhere produced by exces-
sine indulgence with women, because the vit;U fluid that
could ha' e improved tlie stamina of the system has been



As Effects of Sclf-Ahme.



19S



lost without satisfaction ; consequently no gratification
of the mind has been bad in counterpoise, to compensate,
and, ia some measure, to repair the expenditure of
power.

The man who, from liis anxiety to indulge to the ut-
most his hbidinous propensities, seeks for variety among
women, may certainly Cud in such variety a new stimu-
lus sufficient for the occasion, and may be able to ac-
complish more frequent repetitions of the sexual act
than the sober, married man who is faithl'iil to one. But
we camiot overlook the fact that this is undoubtedly ac-
complished at the expense of a corresponding amount
of unnatui'ally-excited energy; and the ultimate results
of such efforts tell with fearful and tremendous horror
upon the helpless and debilitated votary of greedy
pleasure. . The niglitly partner of a husband's bed si-
lently offers only that gratification which is demanded
by the sexual ogans when fully charged with the feemi-
nal fluid, and impatient for relief; to such a man the
stimulus of variety is unsought, contemned, forbidden,
as contrary not merely to all laws, human and divine,
but as directly opposed to his well-being, and to the
maintenance of his animal organization in health,
strength, and usefulness. Here, then, the natural laws
of his physical constitution harmonize most admirably
with the higher sanctions of morality. The actual
amount of enjoyment realized by the temperate is, m
the long run, far greater; power is maintained until old
age, and a vigorous offspring is engendered; while tlie
hasty, violent, and foi'ccid gr.atifl cations of the Sensual-
ist, Ihougli vivid for a moment, are succeeded by
worst form of helplessness — insatiable desire, apj^onde^



196 Self-Abuse, Sterility, Impotence.



to diseased and powerless organs. The draining of
the seminal fluid, whicli occurs eitlier from excessi\e in-
dulgence in venereal gratilications, or from solitary vice,
is not equally great in every instance. There are some
individuals who are not rendered absolutely but only
partially impotent. They can accomplish the sexual
act occasionally, and with severe eflbrt, to the disgust,
doubtlessly, of the female ; or they are tolerably capa-
ble, yet uuprolific. Their powers are weakened, not al •
gccher destroyed. These patients have resources left in
surgical skill, which, if expended in contending against
Improper or imskilful treatment, are lost roiiiiVJSK.

The debility produced by masturbation starts a dif-
ficulty in the choice of remedies which does not occur
in other cases. To excite, yet not irritate, — this is the
point of divergency, where cautious science leaves
blundering quackery to pursue her blind, injurious
course. It is a law of animal organization that when
motion is increased, the increase is most considerable
in those parts whicli are most susceptible, and these,
among Sensualists, are the parts of generation ; there-
fore, the eflbctd of irritating remedies are most sensibly
and instantly felt in these parts, enforcing the utmost
circumspection, not merely in the selection, but in the
administration and emi)loyment of medical agents.
Thus, sterility may be, in some cases, only apparent
Although it be perfectly true that in a few instances
tlic uterine system of the female may be insensible to
the seminal stimulus of a particular individual, yet ca-
pable of being acted upon by another, the lapse of a little
time is often sulDcient (if thei-e have been no debilitat-
ing causes in operation bcfijni mamage,) to distipata



Sexual Philosophy. IVI

gi-oundless fear ; and such %eing the truth, It becomes
doubly important, not only that proper treatment be
adopted where absolutely demanded, but that science
Bhould determine whether any or what kind of inter-
ference be really necessary. Offspring is frequently
denied to newly-married persons from eagerness in its
pursuit. The consequences of excessive venery in those
whom warm passion has united in its indissoluble tie,
amount only to the defeat of their wishes. Celsus re-
marked upon this subject, more than eighteen centuries
ago: " Eainis concuhitus corpus excitat, frequens
solvit;" which may be freely translated, " the bodily
powers are excited by occasional coition, by frequent
repetition they become relaxed," and, consequently, un-
proliflc; or, as a poet has expressed the same sen-
timent —

" WTiile temperate pleasure spurs the lazy blood,
Excess unstrings the nerves, and dries the flood ; "

and so t^uly it is within the experience of many that
when tl'e first warm anxiety for oflSspriug, and its cor-
respop ling efforts, have passed away and subsided, the
blessing is granted to less passionate, exciting, and fre-
quent embraces.

The ancient physicians were right in their general
rule: the longer parties abstain, the more quickly they
generate. Almost all physiologists now agree that the
retention of semen for some few days, or temi)orary
abstinence from coition, is necessary to generation.
During my practice many persons have consulted me
on account of want of family, which entirely arose from
this cause. Such cases require great delicacy in their
Investisjatiou, but it is not difficult to learn their nature,



198 On Generative Capacity.

when science, caution and Sympatliy are duly exerted.
Conjugal, domestic, and social inconveniences musl
always be avoided; and it is scarcely to be observed,
be cause ot its obvious truth, that excessive sexual eujoy-
menl retoes both parties, and may, even in the niaiTied
Btate, defeat its own end, be unfruitful from too frequent
repetition, and bring on that atony, weakness, and
debility of the generative organs, which may end iu
Bterility in the female and impotence in the male.

If these things be so, (and who will dare to contravene
their truth, founded as it is on the ordinary every-day
observation of mankind?) it follows that there may be,
and are, varieties of seminal weakness, originating
most commonly in nocturnal emissions, and these, de-
pendent, in many instances, (but not invariably so,) on
the unnatural practice of self-pollution, to which such
vxiple reference has been made in the foregoing pages.
Tliat these emissions lead to the most deplorable con-
sequences, independently of the injury done to the
generative function, is indisputable. The most studious
poople, and those of a splenetic cast, are subject to this
Infirmity ; and the discharge of semen is commonly so
considerable that they fall into a slow, wasting con-
sumption. A Roman physician (whose opinion is sup-
ported by John of Acarius, author of a work com-
posed for the Emperor,) observes: "If nocturnal
emissions continue anytime, the necessary consequences
are consumption and death ; for the most balsamic part
of the humor and annimal spirit is dissipated; the whole
body falls awiy, and particularly the back; the patients
become feeble, dry, and pale; they languish in slow,
melancholy agony." Let this antiquated, yet terrillcally



♦

Tlie Curse of ■Self-Abuse. - 190



correct portraiture deter the thoughtless from practices
which lead to such a state ; and by those in whom it is
commencing, let not incipient evil be deemed unworthj
of their most serious consideration.

Sterility, however, is frequently the vice of the fe-
male organs, under circumstances which preclude
Its possibility on the part of the male. It may de-
pend, in woman, either from malformation, which, in
reference to the internal and hidden structure, is more
common than is generally supposed; or it may be de-
pendant upon some imperfect action of the generative
organs. In some instances the ovaria are wanting or
too small, the fallopian tubes may be impervious, or the
uterus unnaturally small. With this state of the parts
there is associated a want of due development of the
breasts, and the sexual desirt is inconsiderable. But in
by far the greater majority of barren women the or-
gans of generation seem to be well formed ; neverthe-
less, the action is imperfect or disordered. The men-
strual secretion is either obstructed or sparing, for the
reverse defect occurs, and tiicy are troubled with pro-
fuse discharges, either occurring at the natural period,
or at irregular intervals, perhaps alternating with copi-
ous mucal secretions of an acrimonious and whitish
glairy fluid. It is extremely rare for conception to
occur unless a woman menstruate regularly ; and on the
contrary, correct menstruation generally indicates ca-
pability of impregnation on the part of the female.
Womcm who are very corpulent are often barren, for
their corpulence cither depends upon want of activity in
the ovaries, (castratef) animals generally becoming fat,)
or it exists as a marV of wx^Kuess of the generative sys*



200 Impolenca and SteriMly,

tern, and of the uterine or<;ans in particular. This slate
of weakness and exliaustion of tlio generative system
(however induced,) is unfinestionably u frequent causo
of female sterility ; and among the causes which entail
loss of fital and productive energy, excessive indul-
gence is one of tlie most prominent. Hence, as befoni
observed, prostitutes seldom conceive; not alone be-
cause the frequent repetition of the act blunts sensibility
to enjoyment, but also because of the atony of genera-
tive power. Must it be added that vicious indulr/ences,
solitary praclices, find their way to the chamber o f un-
married girls f The fact is unfortunately too well at-
tested. I have known an instance where this horrible
practice was communicated by a depraved domestic to
a family of girls; and in another case that fell under ray
cognizance, the inmates of a lady's school were all,
without exception, devoted to this depraved and de-
structive propensity.

No combination of human ailments can be so pecu-
liarly and painfully distressing to a sensitive mind, aa
that one hidden, yet restlessly-knowing anxiety, arising
from the deferred hope of offspring. The iwssession o*
wealth cannot atone for the absence of that which riche?
caimot purchase, and in vain does the heart turn ii
lonely anguish, as the spring time of existence is rapidlj
flitting away, to its miserable expedients for the allevl
alion of this hopelessly corroding sorrow. I rcmeuibe:
well having seen an accomplished and i)eautil"ul creature,
already married a few years, blest with all that tlifl
world could bestow, burst into tears at the sight of »
chulvby boy borne by a beggar woman. And who doe*
not know of the rejoicings that oft occur, when som*-



Impotence and Sterility. 201

titled dame presents her liege lord with the long-expect-
ed lieir to his vast possessions? As though tlie repro-
ductive act were an almost impossible rarity among the
more n lined and civilized of the sex; as though "while
peasants bring forth in safetj'," and rear in poverty a nu-
merous, hardy brood, any valid reason should be as-
signed why this jirocess should be interrupted among
the higher and more educated classes. If the immuta-
ble laws of organized Nature were more closely ob
set ved and followed, making due allowance for congeni-
tal imperfections, there is no reason why one ehiss of
women should be found to be more prolilic than another;
and I doubt not of the certainty of repeating my fre-
quent and happy experience in the inculcation of such
directions as may ensure to many of my anxious corres-
pondents the long-cherished realization of their fond-
est expectations.

] have analysed the many peculiarities of sexual dis-
appointments ; I have furnished correspondences to and
fro, descending even io minutice as far as permissible;
and I am in possession of others, from which, in my
practice, I derive great assistance. With regard to
steiility on the part of the lemale, and incajnicity to
impregnate on the part of tlie male, an ampler field is
open for "aiding and abetting" such etids, than can be
expressed in ink , or perhaps, suspected or believed by
the world at large, to exist. As I am candid to confess
in sending this publication forth, desu'ous as I have been
of rendering it worthy of perusal, I never intended it to
supersede my own usefulness, either to my neighbors or
Dpyso'f; and should I be in existence when these "pagea
3ifiet 'l>e inspection of a reader solicitous to know mora



202



Impotence and Slerility.



than is here set down, the application, either viva voce
or otherwise, may not jjrove a fruitless proceeding-
Men advanced in years, and others of younger growth
tliere are, who are skeptical ius to the usefulness of art in
completinii the joys of married life; hut if any should
be trustful enough to believe that through such assist-
ance cffcctH have followed on which rested happiness,
health, and not the least essential desideratum, the
maintenance of liimily property, I am ready learlessly to
declare that their faith need not in every instance be
misplaced. I have been, pei'sonally and alone, engaged
in the investi(/ation of this s-uhjectfor several years, and
I have had the satisfaction of efl'ecting, even with parties
whom I have never beheld, the pui-poses for wliich I
have been consulted.

During the act of copulation the external and in-
ternal genital organs of both sexes, which are all sup-
plied by nerves from the same source, are excited and
stimulated: the vagina closes tightly on the penis, the
uterine orifice is in close contact with the orifice of the
male uretln'a ; the tube or oviduct becomes straightened
and erected, and its loose or floating extremity {corjms
finibriaLum,) seizes on the ovary, and allows the male
fluid, after its injection into the cavity of the womb, to
advance through the tube to the ovary, by a species of
vital attraction or suction. The moment the spermatic
fluid arrives at the ovary, which is seized by the ex-
tremity of the uterine tube, it acts on and vivifies one
or more ova or ovules, and forms the new being or
beings. Such is the natural history of the act wl>ich
originates a new being, and it is obvious that in the de-
tection of such DEVIATIONS FKOM NATURE as OCCar



Generative Philosophy.



203



(ionally occur, is to be found the secret which baffles
hope, aud denies to wedded love its legitimate conse-
quences. Those deviations are more numerous and
complicated than at first sight the inexperienced in
sucli researches would imagine, and the imperiection
once rectified by tlie judicious interference of art, iir>
pregnation is almost certain to follow; more especially
when the female has seemingly of a sudden relinquished
lier usual capacity for procreation. Such deficiencies,
though occasionally traceable to the weaker sex, are
most fi-equcntly ascribable to the male, who, though in
every respect strong, healthy, aud robust, is yet the
subject of such morbid dilation of the seminal vessels
as results in premature emissions ; and though able to
perform tlie mere act of copulation properly, yet liom
the exudation of a thin, watery, effete semen, possessing
no adequate vitality, and from its ejaculation at a hjisty
and inefiicient moment, the ordinary mutual excitement
of tlie act being waatiug, impregnation is denied. To
such, where this is the Ciise, my treatment, having a
direct action on tlie seminal vessels, is well calculated to
restore tone and impart energy; and by iuduciug a
liealthy secretion of semen, supply the female with the
mdispensible requisites for a future progeny. Of course,
these remarks exclude absolute congenital deformity,
or malformation, in tiie absence of which the cases are
comparatively very rare, which admit of no relief from
medical art.

We go out of tlie world by the same changes almost
as those by whicli we enter it. We begin as children —
as ch'Ulren we leave otf. We return, at last, to the same
weak and helpless condition as our first. We must



204 Self-Ahuse.

have people to lift us, to provide us nourishment, and
even to feed us. We again iiave need of parents. And
how wise the arrangement! We find tliem again in
our cliildreii, who now talie delight in repaying a pari
oftliut liindness wliicL was shown to them. Chihlron
now step as it were into the place of parents, vvliile our
weaUness transposes us into t he place of children. The.
venerable oak, on the oilier hand, does not enjoj' the
benefit of such a wise regulation. The old decaj'ed
trunk stands alone and forgotten, and endeavors in
vain to procure from foreign aid that suppoit and
assistance which can be the work only of natural aflec-
tion and the bonds of relationship.

The undue loss of the seminal secretion in a natural
way, that is, from too frequent intercourse with the
other sex, is productive of dire evils; but where icsult-
ing from self-pollution, no language can descrilf the
nature of those sufferings which violated nature is (Com-
pelled to endure. All the intellectual faculties are
weakened; the man becomes a coward, apprelieusive
of a thousand ideal dangers, or sinks into the efleniinate
timidity of womanhood! He l)ecomes truly hysterical,
sighs or weeps upon the slightest insult or want of
sympathy with his hypochondriacal sensations. Such
an one commences the career of incipient manhood by
the abuse of Nature's most secret and sacred functions,
and that at a moment when the system is incompletely
formed, when energy and passion need as yet the con-
trolling rule of riper reason. Exclusively absorbed by
Jhis evil practice, all the poweis of mind and body are
wasted in delusive enjoyment.s, in imaginary creations;
and an age of care and anxiety follows, broken only by
oselesa and unavailing regrets.



Self-Abuse.



205



Under the various tonus of this peculiar excitcDient,
but especially in the diseased fancy of the victim of
Bolitary vice, we find associated every species of morbid
sensibility, erratic imagination, and their consequent
results, often indicated by an indecision of character
difficult of comprehension by those who are unac-
quainted with its cause. Waywardness, stubborn self-
iope, selfishness in every modification, or that form of it
which requhes and would attract the anxiety and attcM-
tion of others too exclusively upon himself, — such are
often the mental outlines of a character which secretly
debasing passions have contributed to form. An in-
cessant irlvsome uneasiness, continual anguish, or alter-
nating with fits of unreasonable find childish merriment,
depression or excitement without adequate cause, —
these form some of the mental inquietudes connected
with the practice of masturbation.

All the victim's fire and spirit are deadened by this
detestable vice ; he is like a faded rose, a tree blasted in
its bloom, a wandering skeleton ; nothing remains but
debility, languor, livid paleness, a withered body, and
a degraded soul. A youth endowed by nature with
talent and genius, becomes dull, or totally stupid; the
mind loses all relish for virtuous or exalted ideas ; the
consciousness of the purity and essential holiness of the
Crcatoi; operates as a bar against any approach to Ilim,
or the appropriation of any of those consolations under
Buffering which religion is destined to afl'ord. Tin.'
whole life of such a man is a continued succession ( f
secret reproach, painful sensations arising from the con-
scicusness of having been the fabricator of his own
distress, irresolution, disgust of life, and not mifre-



206



Horrors of Self-Abuse.



queiitly self-imircler. Nay, what in effect is tliis but tht
consummation of slow sell-destructioa ? Could we but
lift the veil of the grave, how siioultl we startle at the
long train of the victims of Seiisuulism!

A gentleman of high connections, and apparently
lK>ssessed of every requisite to make life happy, wiui
foimd unexpectedly dead in his Ijed; a liistol, the in
strument of his deatli, Wiis clenched in his hand. None
coulil account for the rash act, and doubtless, but for
his own revelation, it would have passed away as un-
accountably as the " temporary insanity " of the news-
papers. Upon a piece of paper, in his own handwriting,
were discovered the words, " I a?n impotent and wfit
to live." Scarcely a day passes that deaths by suicide
are not recorded, where no cause is assigned for tlie
deed, but which, from the result of experience, I am
strongly inclined to believe, could we explore the secrets
of the gloomy prison-house, would be easily explained.
Generative debility is not so unfrequent as many sup-
pose; it most usually is the result of sensual excesses;
and the mental agonies of such an one are almost insup-
portable. What bodily i)ain can eqnid the agony of the
soul ? "A wounded spirit who can bear ? " aggravated,
aa those feelings must of necessity be, by the conscious-
ness that to his own imprudence, his own base slavery
to Sensualism, he owes his forlorn, blighted, and miser-
able condition, — a being on whom the eye of beatity
beams not with fond and pure affection, an outcast eves
from the paid embraces of a mercenary wanton.

There is in this class of patients an exquisite sensi
tiveness to external impressions. The slightest changt
of ifeather affects the Sensualist most severely ; he can



Hon-ors of Self-Abuse.



200



uot pprceive the correctness of the reinark that ouvs is
a temperate climate, I'or with him the seasons are always
in extremes ; the summer scorches liim into lassitude,
or he becomes peevish at the continuance of the cold.
Such hidividuals are excessively prone to catarrhal
afiections, they take cold from trifling causes, their
bodies becoming as Iceeuly delicate to external and at-
mos-pheric agencies as the most perlifct barometer.
We lind that in them the lining mucous membrane of
the nostrils and eyes is peculiarly iriitable, fits of long-
continued sneezing annoy them on getting into a cold
bed, or on the sudden approach of a stroug light. The
eyelids become strangely liot and irritable at night, the
handkerchief is in frequent requisition, and a continual
winking and pressure together of the lids is then ol>
Bervable. The most acute pains form another feature
of the increasing malady. They are sometimes referable
to the head, or limbs, but more commonly to the
stomach, foiining the index to that form of Indigestion
resulting from the di-ain upon sensorial energy. Many
miscalled rheumatic diseases are solely dependent upon
this practice. The organs of generation participate
ftlso in the misery of deprivation. It is a singular fact,
that the habit of self-pollution is connected with a dimi-
nution of the size of the penis. The author has had
freqnent occasions to verify this statement. Of noc-
turual emissions, seminal weakness, diseased testicle,
and gleet, as the consequences of masturbation, I Bhall
speak leparately. The diminution of the she of the
f ciiir J one of the first and most obvious effects of this
j" y ' .bit. The vii-ile organ becomes shrunk into loss
f)// ialf its former outline, and what is worse, the



210



Horrorit of Self-Almae.



power of perfect erection is altogether destroyed.. This
Is not wondei-ful, if we reflect upon the diversity of
operation between the natnral sexual act and the vile
friction of the miisturbator. The latter, even if the
seminal vesicles be not sufficiently distended with that
natural stimulus which provokes erection, can produce,
by friction, a higher degree of irritation than is natural,
and lie can command the sensation when it would be im-
possible to maintain the requisite firmness of the organ
lor coition. Thus then a variety of evils are en-
gendered. The testicles are called upon suddenly and
violently to secrete, and the excretory canals to dis-
charge a thin, eflete, unproliflc semen, aud the nerves
of the penis are susceptible of an agi-eeable titillation
without the naturally inseparable adjunct — firm erec-
tion of that organ. Hence, when the masturbator tries
to indulge in coition, he cannot assume the requisite
solidity to effect penetration ; or if he partially eflTect an
entrance into the vagina, it is followed by a premature
emission. The organs have been accustomed to a
vicious perversion, to excrete w ithout erection ; or M
the penis swells for a moment, the genitals of the female
.do not grasp the whole length of that organ with the
rude and forcible friction it has suffered from the humau
hand.

The reader will understand that the prominent, char,
acter of seminal weakness is general, not partial, debil-
ity. With regard to impotence, either partial or com-
plete, it is tlie effect of causes which, whilst themselvea
produced for the most part by improper or excessive
indulgence, may be classed under two general heads,
vii., Organic (local) and Fiuicti ^nal. When the disability



Sierility and Impotence.



211



arises from a local cause, such as disease or mal-
formation of any of the organs of generation, but more
especially disease of the testicles, (such as varicocele,
&c.,) we have functional effects, viz., loss of sexual
poTver, and inability not merely for procreation, but for
the act of copulation. In cases where the disability
exists without any special organic defect, functional
causes exist. So much in this class of disorder is cauE<?-
intermingled with effect, as I have already ol^served in
the earlier portion of this chapter. That which, in one
stage, or under one aspect of malady, operates as a
cause, is, in another stage, or under another aspect, re-
cognized as an effect, and vice versa. The kinds of dis-
ability which I classify as proceeding from constitu-
tional and functional causes, (as distinguished from
organic causes,) are generally curable by a compar-
atively mild ('ourse of treatment, inasmuch as they are
not permanent and structural, like malformation of the
penis, or deprivation of the testicles, for example.

In addition to those named, there are various con-
stitutional causes, of which seminal weakness, impo-
tence, and sterility are the effects. These causes are too
numerous to be recai)itulatcd, but a brief allusion to
them is necessary. • The disorder may arise from general
ill-health, from an unhealthy or perverted state of the
seminal secretions, from an impure and vitiated condi
'.ion of the blood, from the relaxation created by long
rejidence in tropical climates, from venereal affections,
from disordered liver or kidneys, and from several kinds
of oljstinate diseases of the skin. There are occasional,
though comparatively rare, cases, in wliich I have
found an impotence inborn and congenital, and which



212



Sterility and Impotence.



aro cle;<ciib(>,rl by Sir Astley Cooper in a passage more
renuirlcahio for its poetic beauty than for tiic soundness
of tlio conclusions at wliic^li the learned lecturer ai rive%.
" There are," he observes, " several causes -n'hich pro-
duce a destruction of the virile power. These may
sometimes be traced to a peculiar sluggishness oi
constitution, to a general torpor of the procreativ"
system, on which the usual attractive animal aHinitie
exert no inlluence. To such a person a Yenus mighi
display her charms, and on such her son might exhaust
his quiver in vain. No genial spring is here ; no bloom-
ing summer or fruitful autumn; but all is winter, — a
di-eary, barren, and desolate winter, in which the springs
if life are frozen up and the animal propensities de-
stroyed. Some men are so constituted that they may be
said never to possess a venereal stimulus, and some of
the other sex are equally frigid. I knew a person who
remained unwanned by the flame from the hymeneal
altar I'or seven years, and who was incapable of per-
forming the duties which devolved upon him." The
mistake hei'e made by Sir Astley Cooper is in suppos-
ing that faculties are destroyed, which, in reality, arc-
only held in a state of SMspe77.se or dormancy. Sii
Astley spoke, or wrote, nearly fifty years ago. Science
has since ])roved that in numbers of ca.ses similar Ui
those to which he alludes, the physical peculiarities,
formerly supposed to be incurable, are quite within the
reach of the healing art.

Incidental to the effectii of Spermatorrhoea leading'
to impotence, may be mentioned schiirot'ity 0/ th
gland of the testicle, which, if not checked, may ulti-
Qial?ly proceed to total destruction of that all-impor-



Affections of the Testicles. 213



tant genin'ative organ. This disorder is chaiMcterized
by a slow and insidious progi-ess, the ellcct being for a
long timt! imperceptible, unless by very close investiga-
tion. A morbid action in the epididymis, which is a
part of the testicle consisting of a number of small ves-
Bcls and ducts upwards of forty feet in length, is another
symptom, which, whilst among the frequent effects of
Spermatorrhoea, is an active cause of impotence. To
the samd category of cause and efl'ect may be referred
hydroce'e, or dropsy of the testicle, a disarrangement
wbi^h is usually comparatively easy of detection.

r ut of all the symptoms which are to be designated
amiirgs\ the effects of Spei'matorrhcea, and causes of
Bex \id mpoteuce, there is none more common than •
the disorder termed varicocele, or enlargement of
the " einsi of the testicle. This malady tends to the de-
struction of the testicle by morbid pressure upon
the aiii\ and sometimes absolutely displaces the organ
fi'om its proper position in the scrotum or rugged
bag, ^7hich is its natural receptacle.

I bare known some distressing ca.ses, in which, after
the disiia.se had continued some time, the scrotum has
acquire ! such an excessive degree of pendulous elonga-
tion as to reach half-way down to the knee ; and I have
on such occasions had some difficulty in imparting sulli-
cient tone and vigor to the organ to make it resjjoiid
according to my desire to the subsequent stages ol
treatment. It hangs from the body in a flabby, humid,
unnei-ved condition, and requires artificial support in
order to keep it from being constantly troublesome to
the pj/ient. Whilst the disoider is progressing, the
Sperm' torrhcea or unnatural loss ol' seed which cause*



214



Miscellaneous Causes.



it, hourly increases in inveteracy; althougli it is possV-
ble tliat, pending this transit li-om bad to worse, the af-
flicted individual may labor under the idea either that
he is well or all bnt well, that the aflection is a trifling
one, or that a rapid cure is taking place. This delusion
is encouraged by the circumstance which I have before
dilverted to, of nocturnal seminal discharge so often
changiug, at an advanced stage of the disease, into (he
diurnal and less perceptible one, — a state of things,
which, unfortunately, too often baffles the practitioner
as much as it does the patient, if the attention of the
former has not been specilically directed to the investi-
gation of generative disorders, their causes, symptoms,
and eflects. As incipient varicocele, indicated in the
first pl.ice by some difference between the size of the
testicles, and the length to which they depend, is a cer-
lain indication of semin;il weakness and approaching
unpct«nce, few social and domestic duties appear of
mc re real importance than that every individual who,
from any cause whatever, has the sligiitest suspicion or
doubt as to his condition, should ob'ain careful examina-
tion from a medical man of known skill and experience.
Not only incurable or distressing disorder, but a thous-
and anxieties having reference thereto, may be prevent-
ed by sucii examination, combined, of course, witli the
Bkillful use of the microscope (the indispensable vade
mecum of scientific investigation,) by the practitioner
who undertakes the diagnosis. By these means the or-
ganization can be thoroughly and minutely inspected,
and any initiative disease or loss of function detected
and arrested ere the malady has !is.sumed a malig-
nant form.



Miseellaneous Causes. . .215

It happens sometimes, thongli rarely, Ibat disease in
the prostate gland is an organic cause of impotence"
the seminal canal which runs through the gland becom-
ing relaxed, or otherwise injured, though tlie rest of the
generative apparatus, including the testicles, may be
healthy. This, however, is of unfrcqnent occurrence;
for in nineteen cases out of twenty, when impotence
supervenes, the testicles will be found in a morbid con-
dition. Cases of impotence arising from other organic
disorders, are rare indeed; and us most minute inquiry
and examination, and a complete revelation of all an-
tecedent circumstances, are requisite for the ascertain-
ment of the real source of the mischief, the failure of
" patent medicines " is accoun'^'jd for, and the folly of
haviug i-ecourse to mere nostrums is obvious.

Other affections, such as stricture of the urethra and
raalfonnation of organs, (the unnatural enlargement
of the penis, &c.) may be accounted among the organic
causes which produce the effect of in>potence.

In Si/ermatorrhoea proper, which includes the imper-
ceptible discharge of semen in the urine, and percep-
tible discharge almost immediately on the contact of
the male organs with those of tlie female, the testicle
may remain for some time free from apparent disease ;
hence the importance of the microscope in determining
and diHcoverincj that which may othei-wise remain un-
known. But the results of my cxperienee convince me
Oiat in that stage of Spermatorrhosa where there are
both nocturnal discharges, and diurnal emissions in the
arine or stool and in the form of dribbling moisture,
there will atmost alway^i be found some disorder in the
testicle and epididymis. The scrotum will bo found to



216



Effects on the Testicle,



hang very low; or one testicle (usually the left,) will
hang much below the other. The glands of the testicle,
when they can be properly felt, (which is not always
the case,) will be too large or too small, too soft or too
hard ; sometimes excessively sensitive, if not actually
pauiful; and when varicocele is present, the testicle
j. feels as if dispersed into small irregular knots. The
' sensation to the touch, in such cases, has been com
pared, not inaptly, to that experienced on feeling a ba^
of earihworms.

It is necessary to remind the reader, in reference to
diseases connected with the testicles, that these imports
ant organs, before they descend into the scrotum or
purse, occupy a very difl'erent position. They are re-
tained in the abdomen until about the hist mouth before
tlie birth of the child ; thence they descend to the groin,
and from this to their final situation in the body. It
sometimes happens, however, that the process of descent
is delayed for years, and this circumstance has often
caused ignorant surgeons and apothecaries to regard
their absence from the scrotum as an indication of con-
genital iuipotence. In the last century it was main-
tained Uy the celebrated John Hunter that the testicles,
when conlined in tlie abdomen, do not fully exercise
tlieir functions ; but this idea has been long disproved.
Sir Astley Cooper informs us of an apprentice of his
own " who shot himself because liis testicles had not
desceuded," and in whom, on autopsy, the secretory
glands were found full of semen. It is a pity that Sir
Astley had not made his unfortunate pupil aware of a
physiological fact, which is certainly not less important
fhau many oUiers that form the subject of lucraliva



And Phinolofjy uf the Organ.



217



lectures. I recollect a case where, IVoni ignorance of
these iinatouiical facts, a mryeoii (!) had actually
dh-ected a j'outh to the house ol' a surgical instrument
maker to ask /or a double tru^s, under the imiiression
that the small enlargements visible in each groin were
protusions of bowel, when, in truth, Xature, somewhat
tardy in her operations, was about effecting the ilescent
of the testicles into their ordinary receptacle. I'or-
unately, in this instance, the intelligent dealer m trussca
detected the real nature of the case. Had it been other-
wise, the youth would doubtlessly have been maimed
and impotent for lile, from the pressure of the pad of the
truss upon this exquisitely delicate organ.

It is well known that the testicles may not descend into
the scrotum, though tliey may l)e fully developed in the
body, and perform their functions perfectly; indeed,
according to some writers, better th'.a in the natural
situation. But this is questioHfib'.e. i was once con-
sulted by a young gentleman w'lo \a(i but one testicle
in the usual situation, as to tb'^ propriety of his con-
tracting marriage; the cXlv.i- testicle had never de-
scended, and he was otberwit^; v/ell developed, robust,
and healthy. I advised aici to marry ; he did so, and
became a parent. Similai i!:cidents have occurred in
the practice of others. So, the destruction of one tes-
ticle by castration or disease is no impediment to pr(H
creatiun, any more than the loss of one eye is to vision.
But when both testicles are completely diseased, or
where alternately, from repeated attackr, of GoiKjrrhoea,
each of these organs becomes in turn in/lamed and
enlarged, the utmost care and the mos* scientiiically
cautious management are demanded, )cs'. the future



218 Plain and Practical Truths.

power of secretion be materially diminished or abso
Uitely destroyed. The slightest reflection upon the
structure of the testicle will serve to convince the
reader that it is, in truth, wonderful that inflammatory
swelling does not more frequently disorganise, thicken,
and obliterate the delicate and curiously contorted tubes
of which its substance is composed. The testicle is of
oval form, of the size of a pigeon's egg ; it is a little
flattened on the sides ; it hangs in the scrotum by the
spermatic cord, which is, in fact, nothing more than the
excretory canal leading from the testicle to the urinary
passage, the artery or blood vessel destined for the
nutriment of the testicle, some nerves and veins,
constituting, by their approximation, a species of soft
string, occasionally the subject of disease. As to the
semen itself, it is eliminated by the testicles, and sep-
arated from the blood, carried thither by the arteries
of the cord. As to the course of the semen, we find
it passing first upwards, along the ms deferens^ or
lengthened canal, leading from the point of its forma-
tion, then deeply downwards and backwards, to the
termination of this canal on either side, in the urinary
passage.

It is undoubtedly true that the thinner parts of the
semen, distending the vesiculcB seminales or seminal re-
ceptacles, become absorbed into the living massof cu-cu-
lating blood in the body. The gelatinous residuum
contained in the cells is rendered thereby more acrid
and stimulating, provoking the natural desire ; and when
in this way Nature herself solicits the sexual act as a
relief to the distended receptacles, there can be no
doubt that, aa Sauctorius observes, " Moderate coition is



On Symptoms and Effects. 219

41

gt>od, but when it is solicited by the imagination it
weakens all the faculties, and esjjecially the memory.^

' Nor is this difBciilt of explanation. When the vesiculce
seminales are replete with a secretion that, by the loss
(if its more fluid parts, has occupied a certain degi'ee of
consistency, rendering its entire return into the circula-
tion difficult if not impossible, and when, under these
circumstances, evacuation follows, we may be assuied
that the body will not thereby become debilitated. The
act of evacuation, (however induced,) is more pernicious
according as it is nnnecessarj'- ; and because the mas-
turbator has the power of exciting these organs to ex-
crete a thin fluid, when the seminal vesicles contain
nothing sufficiently stimulating to rouse the erection
necessary for the natural sexual act, he is able to perpe-
trate so much the greater mischief.

It will be remembered that excessive nervousness and
morbid imtability are among the Spermatorrhoeal ef-

- fects which are directly the causes of impotence.
Throughout the course of my professional labors I nev-
er lose sight of the influence of the nervous system
and the imagination upon the generative organs. The
physical sympathy is so intimate that mere ideas, con-
veyed thiough the brain and nerves, often lead to Sper-
matorrhoea, and to premature effusion on coition ; the
effect being more or less permanent and dangerous, ac-
(ordlng to the degree of irritation ordinarily prevailing
in the cerebral organs.

It has been stated that, in the great uvijority of cases,
ilie testicles are specifically disordered, both in decided
and partial impotence. But it may be right to apprise
the general reader that seminal discharges at stool or



220 On Si/m2)toms and Effects.

during urination, ratiier indicate disease in the vetwnla
mninales or seed lihuUlers tlinn in tlie testicles. In
such cases the morbid discharge arises from two me-
chanical causes. If tiie discharge taljes place whilst
urinating, it is caused by pressure of the urinary biail-
der downwiuds upon tlie seed bladders, which lie imme-
diately underneath, and have become so weakened or
relaxed as to be unable to withstand a pressure which,
whilst in health, can produce no perceptible effect, but
which now creates such a degree of irritation that the
semen is forced out into the urethra; for a high degree
of nervous sensiljility always exists when the organs are
ill a state of debility. Almost in the same way, when at
stool, a costive motion, (constipation, alternating with
diarrhoea, being a general condition of seminal wcik-
ness,) presses the rectum or lower bowel against the re-
laxed and sensitive seed bladders, forces the seinii:al
fluid into the urethra, and thus a portion oozes out
tlu'ougii the orifice of the penis.

I have thus gone through some of the principal cf I6e
Ciuises, symptoms, and effects of seminal weakness- -I lie
three conditions being frequently so nearly identical w tb
or dependant ou each other that it lias not been al .vays
possible to keep them separate, with due regard to whal
may be termed I he entirety of the subject.

Always bearing in recollection the 2^ossil)ilUy thai af-
fections of this deplorable nature may supervene silently,
insidiously, from other causes besides any of those meu-
lioned, :ind may go on for years increasing in violence
and malignity, whilst- the suflferer may be actually un-
conscious of his ainiction, it is more than probable thai
the iullnite uiiyority of instances in wMch proinisii g



On Symphmis and Effects.



221



marriages turn- out " unfoituiiately," as it is termed —
tliat llie influite majority of irrecoucileable niatrimouial
antipathies, separaliuns, divorces, viokuioiis of viitue
aud decorum ---of sicldy, piuiug ofi'spriug, perisliiiig iu
'ufaiicj', and of no offspring at all — arise from tlie neg-
lect of that precaution which every man ought to talco
ero he commits himself to the duties and responsilMlitiei
of wf dded life; aud it is equally probable that the cor-
tinued aud increasing embitterments between co\.pl(.g
already united arise in*t.lie same manner from neglect —
from neglecting an application or inquiry which might
result in the removal of the most common cause ol
chagrin, discontent, and approximate disgust. Let me
distinctly explain my meaning. Nothing is more easy
for a person contemplating matrimony than to satisfy
himself, by consultation with a professional man of char-
acter and integrity, whethei- his physical stare be really
such as to render it advisable for him to enter at once,
without postponement, into the most important of all
engagements — whether his state be such as to enable
him efficiently to fulfil all the expectations of a fond,
confiding, ardently-loving bride.

So, likewise, as respects the married man whose hopes
have been disappointed; wiio, whilst self-deceived, has
unwittingly deceived another; and whose matrimonial
lift! is resolving itself into a concatenation of mutual
repining, mutual discontent, mutual recrimination, mu-
tual misery; it is very probable that by a brief consulta-
lion with a physician who has made this part of thera-
peutics his study, the hapless Benedict will soon, to the
inlhiite solace of both parties, put a satisfactory end to
all this repining, all this recrimination, all this miserj



222



Friendly Suggestions.



and dinconteut. I might fill a volume exceeding tenfold
the dimensions of tlie present, if I were to enter into
the details of a tithe of the cases in which I have Iiad
the satisfaction of recalling the long-forgotten reality of
early love, and of substituting thankful gladness for
dreary despair. But I purposely refrain from sucl> dtv
tails; my object is friendly suggestion — not UBportun*lf
dictation.



Detection of Sjpcnnatorrhcea. 223



SECTION vn.

DKTKCTION OF SPERM ATORRHfEA OR SEMINAL WEAK-
NESS, BY MICROSCOPIC EXAMINATION AND
OTHERWISE.

The deteiTnination of means for the absolute and
definite ascerUiinment of the existence or non-existence
of morbid Spermatorrhoea, is a scientific achievement ol
very recent date. It may be stated, without exaggera-
tion, tliat tile moit eniini^nt investigaloi's of the hist gen-
eration had. so far as respects tlie detection of the symp-
toms, advanced very little beyond tlie facts fixed on by
tlie pliysiological writers of ancient Greece and l!onie.
John Hunter, it may Ije affirmed, great and undoubted
as was liis proficiency in every Ijranch of medical learn-
ing to which the knowledge of his age extended, was
actually ignorant of the facts which in our time arc ac-
counted among tlie most obvious of tlie plicnomena
that were formerly set down as anomalies. The word
anomaly, by-the-byc, in relerencc to natural pLcnomena,
is a misnomer. Nature has no anomalies, and her ap-
parent deviations from law and order might always, il
pursued to tiieir source, be traced to causes originating,
remotely or directly, in mere disregard of her ordi-
nances.

Tlie agent to which we are chiefly indebted for deter-
niinalion and certainty respecting the presence of Sper-



224



Detection 0/ Spennatwrrlioeu,



matoiThoea, is the Microscope ; au instruinent which
witliiu the last few years has been brought to a degree
of perlectioa totally unknown to our forefathers.

Much hiis been said and written upon the wonders re-
vealed by the microscope; of the revelations eflected
through it of a life within a life, running through all
creation, and exhibiting activity in materials apparentij
the most inanimate. It has made us intimately ac-
quainted witli the structure and habits of creatures,
the size of which varies from the twenty-four thousandth
part of an inch in length, to the one forty thousandth
part. By the microscope we know that an object no
larger than the smallest sized duckshot exceeds in bulk
many millions of certain classes of animalcules, and that
a single drop of water contains a greater number than
could be detected in a long life. But whilst the micro-
scope is to be admired for the wonders wliif-h it leveals,
still more admirable is it on the score of its utility — its
utility in enabling those whom long experience h:u« made
familiar with its use to detect the latent causes i f hu-
man suffering with a view to their removal.

In the treatment of the disease- which forms the prin-
ciiial subject of these chapters, the utmost deg-i^e of
uncertainty formerly prevailed; there was a random
wildness and contrariety in the course adopted by va-
rious practitioners, which too truly indicated the low
ebb of professional information on the subject; and this
uncertainty and ignorance proved the li-uitl'ul sourct
of calamity.

A brief explanation will show how this occurred. Th»
morbid discharges from the urethra, wliich, without the
ud afforded by the skill'ul and caieful use of (.he micro-



Ancient Ljnorance and Errors. 225

icope, might be mistaken for Spermiitonlicea, are of
vai-ious Iviuds. Among them may be accoLiuted the
ilight discharge which sometimes remains after Gleet;
also that connected with stricture of 1 he urethra, and the
mucous emission from the prostate gland (commonly
called the prostatic discharge) and from the mucous
membrane. The remnant of a syphilitic attack is also
sometimes indicated by a discharge, which nothing but.
great care aud experience can distinguish from Sper-
matorrhea or escape of the seed.

Now, each of these affections, besides similar onea;
which I do not think necessary to enumerate, possesses
distinct characteristics, requiring a mode of treatment
different from the others. The misfortune was, then,
that there being no certain means by which any of the
others could be distinguished from Spermatorrhoea, the
iattei" disease was not uufreciuenl-ly met by a treatment
rhe very reverse of that which was properly applicable
to it, and the results were, of course, more disas-
trous. There were, in short, no means of dkteo
TioN — no means of positively detkcting tlie pres-
ence of Spermatorrhoea, as contra-distiuguislicd from
alTcctions similar in appearance, but cpiite opposite
hi nature.

Thus the seminal was sometimes mistaken for a gleety
or aypldlitic discJianje, and subjected to what waa
Ciilled "active treatment." Cubebs, copaiba, mercury
and a/jtringent injections were administered, the eflecl
of which was to produce a high degree of iuflanmiation,
and to irriUite and aggravate the real malady, wliich,
being incapable of being detected, was very often not
tycn mnpected ; and so its ravages went on unchecked



226



Indications for Detection.



or, more properly speaking, iuflamed and stimulated by

the merticaments applied to them.

It would be unjust to impute blame to the practition-
ers of those bygone times. In tlie impossibility of de-
tecting the real disease they bad to make choice of tlio
alternative eitlier of striking in the dark, or of permit-
ting tlie disorder, whatever it was, to pursue its deadly
career witliout an atu^mpt to restrain it. Tliey chose
the former alternative. They struck in the dark, but
too often their blow was fatal to the patient instead o(
to the disease.

That state of tilings is happily changed. Whilst it is
certain that in eases of morbid emission from the urethua,
a derangement of some kind or another will, it may
almost be said without exception, be fonnd in the tes-
ticles, it is not less so that each description of discharge
has a characleristic peculiarity of its own, which tiie
microscope enables ns to identifv as dilierent from the
others. Thus, the presence of Spermatozoa in the urine
or in the driljbling effusion aflbi'ds unmistakable evi-
dence of Sperinatorrliaia. If, on the <ither hand, tiio
discharge be connected with gleet arising from gon-
orrhoea, nnnute globular particles characleristic of thai
atfeclion will be discovered by the microsco|)ic test. Id
like maimer, when the discharge is syphilitic, the lineal
ind almost crystalline formation can be discovered, and
the class of disorder is thus defined. When it is con-
lidered that filly years back there was no jiossibility ol
thus ascertaining the nature of disease, 'lud that physi-
cians were comi)elled to act without any assurance
ugainsl the possibility that their utmost exertions were
doing the patient mischief, instead of good, and that (he



Indications for Detection.



237



more vigorous their endeavors to effect a core the
greater the amount of injury which they might be in-
tl ctiiig on his constitution, some idea may be formed of
tlie sad state of confusion in which tliis department ol
tlierapeiitics was involved.

But the errors of the elder physicians have been suc-
ceeded in our own times by a mistalce of another kind,
and tlie effects of wliich ai'e also deplorable. Fonnerly,
tlie danger was that the pliysician, scarcely aware of the
very nature of Spermatorrhoea, generally failed to dis-
cover its existence, and treated it as if if were a disorder
of a \ery different Idnd. Now, since the dangerous im-
portance of Spermatorrhoea has been brought to light,
it is, by the inexperienced and ill-informed membei's of
the profession, declared to be present upon every ap-
pearance of unhealthy discharge. From tlie extreme of
negligence they have rushed to that of childish nervous-
ness respecting Spermatorrhoea. Thus, at present, in-
stead of Spermatorrhoea being mistaken for other
disea.ses, other classes of disorder are frequently mis-
taken for Spermatorrhoea. This happens not unusually
in the case of obstinate gleets, as well as in that of the
dischai'ge, similar in appearance, which occasionally
remains after sypliilis. The maltreatment administtired
causes the affection not only to continue, but to become
more obstinate, and, apparently, even incurable.

Mistakes of either kind produce distressing effects, not
merely ultimately, in a physical sense, but (separated
from that,) also with regard to the present comfort of
the pati(!nt, and to circumstances most important, per-
naps, to his prospects and fortune. It will happen, for
example, that Spermatorrhoea is mistaken for the gonw



Danger of Mistakes.



rhoeal 01 syphilitic affecUou; and f heu the suSerei, -
peiliapd at a time wlien matiimony rniglit be a(lvisal)Ie,
— is afi'aid to coutract that tie lest liis wife should lie
injured hy iiiipiire congress; and so an arrangement,
desirable in every respect, is postponed, perhaps lor
ever. If, on the other hand, he is led by the medical
advice which he has tal^eu to attriljutc the discharge to
Spermatorrhoea (Spermatorrlio-a all the while not being
present,^ he is, in lilce manner, restrained through fejir
of being unable to consummate the nuptial duties.

These remarlcs will serve to indicate some of the
great benefits which have been conferred on humanity
by the pitch of perfection to which the microscope has
been brought, and the power which it gives practitioners
really acquainted with its uses, to detect, loUhout ihe
possibility of mistake, the nature of any existing mal-
ady, and thus to exhibit the medicines best calculated
for their removal. I could, in truth, i-ecount hundreds
on hundreds of instances, in which the utmost distress
of mind, the bitter agony of disappointed hope, the
torturing fear that life was a total i)light, the feeling
of degradation, of hopelessness, of despair, have been
scattered to the winds and replaced by health, spirits,
and happiness, through the remit of one timely and, as
it has sometimes occurred, almost accidental consul-
taiion. Such consultation has led to a minute exami-
•iiation of the urine, or of the Utile discharge from ihe
urethra wliich Iiad been the cause of uneasiness ; and
the consequence has been the dispersion of unfounded
or cxaggei'ated fear, and the ado])tiou of the course ol
treatment adapted to tlie removal of any derangement
which nuilly existed, and which has often been most



Qualification for Inquiry. 220



easy of cure in the very cases luhere the fears and
despondency of the imtient had been most profound,
li] on the other hand, the symptoms were serious, the
great- point was gained that their meaning was now
understood, and the steps to be taken for cure were
satisfactorily indicated. Snch are the advantages wliich
the microscope confers in the all-important task oi
detecting the real nature of disease.

But it must be especially observed, in connection
with the efficacy of microscopic examination, that com-
petency to use that instrument with advaniac/e can only
be acquired by a long course of study and practice.
The l)cst class of instruments, "U'hich alone are capable
of effecting trustworthy diagnosis, are probably more
complicated in construction than any other machine tc
which science has recoiu'se. They are composed of in-
numerable parts, the proper working of all depending on
the perfect order and skilful handling of each; and the
least awkwardness or error in the adjustment of p,ny of
them, the least divergence from the proper focus of light,
the least excess or diminution in the quantity of light,
may disarrange the whole proceeding. It is tlu'ough this
circumstance that some gentlemen who have attemjited
microscnpi^ inquiries without acquiring a sufficient
am.)uut of experience, have from time to time fallen
into such serious blunders. I am, for my own part, free
to admit, and I do not fear that the admission will
Bubj(!Ct me to any imjnitation of dullness, that I waa
no less than live years studying and observing the
operation of the instrument, under every variety of
cii'cumstance and position, and had tested it in every
way which my own mind and the advice of eminent



Qualifications for inquiry.



i;rofessif)nal friends, at home and abroad, could suggest,
before I could trust myself to act practically, for patho-
logical purposes, upon the results of my experience oi
it. From what I have heard, I am disposed to- think
that it is a very great pity that every medical man who
undertakes to deal with an instrument so delicate and
complex in itself, so liable to be mismanaged or
deranged, so infallible when skilfully handled, but so
apt to deceive and mislead if there be the slightest error
or incapacity on the part of the practitioner, — it is, I
say, a pily that every medical man who undertakes to
deal with so critical an instrument does not exercise
similar industry and precaution with myself.

Having alluded to the distinctive signs by which gon-
orrhceal and syphilitic discharge may be discerned fi-om
Spermatorrhoea, I ought to observe that there are other
signs, besides the contents of the respective discharges,
through which the identity of either may be ascertained.
Thus, the slight mucus-like discharge in the urine
usually occurs when it is the effect of syphilis or gon-
orrhoea, along with the first drops whilst emptying the
bladder; but the discharge in Spermatorrhoea occura
with the last droits of the urine — sometimes, a lew
seconds after the urine has passed, in whith case the
spermatic effusion is apt to be accompanied by a spas-
modic twinge or contraction caused by the pressure
ipon the seed-vessels. There are, in short, various
modes of diagnosis. A practised eye, for example, can
readily distinguish, by examination of the patient's
linen, wh(;ther the stains be produced by si)ermatic or
by ordinary venereal afl'ection ; and the modern annals
of inedico-legal inquiry present several cases wherein



Means oj Detection.



231



the last-named mode of test has decided the queslions
oITecting the liberty of accused persons.

But the microscope is, after all, tlie grand and aus-
picious agency by which doubts of every kind can ai
once be determined. So Protean and capricious are the
aspects and attitudes asmmcd hy seminal disease that
tt is literally impossible to lay down any dogmatic stan-
dards of treatment which would apply to every case.
The symptoms vary, both in intensity and contimiity,
according to innumerable circumstances dependent on
•ige, occupation, congeiatal temperament, the kind ol
climate in which the patient may have resided during
jcrtaiu periods of his lU'e; likewise according to his
general habit of body, &c. ; and so arbitrary are these
Vi'\riations that, for the great object of safety, it is es-
sentially requisite that each case slioukl be studied in
itself, and that every one desirous of ascertaining his
actual condition slionld submit himself patiently to give
candid and explicit answers to the inqiuries which
experience may put to him, with respect to any cir-
cumstances that could effect his health injuriously or
otherwise.

It is to be recollected, that in connection with sper-
matic disorder there may be such a thing as groundless
fear as well as groundless confidence. If thousands on
thousands perish, as they undoubtedly do, through not
knowing, until too late, the nature of the dangeroua
malady wluch is preying upon their vitals, gi'eat num-
bers endure much needless torture of mind in conse-
quence of the fear that deadly disease is present, when
the afiection is of a comparatively trifliug kind, easilj
removable the moment it is understood.



232 Importance of Examination.

But therein lies the difficulty. The words [iriiited in
italics represent the whole contingency. The failure o/
the inexperienced " general practitioner" to detect and
understand the symptoms of the case before hiui, is ac-
countaljle for the greater part of the evil and misery
incidental to derangements of the genital organiza-
tion ; and the miscliief ife indefinitely increased by the
attempt to apply what are called "general rules" to
a departmeut of pathology which varies in almost
every patient.

Acting always on the principle that iuvestigatious as
to the absence or presence of disease, and as to its
nature, wlicre present, must be conducted indivlduully,
with a view to the particular idiosyncracies of eacii
person, I shall be happy, when consulted, to appi j the
fruits of my long studies, and probably unparalleled ex-
perience, in removing needless fears Vhere no cause lor
fear exists, and, where disease is really threatened, or
has alieady begun its ravages, in staying its onward
coui'se, and by timely use of judicious measures, eradi-
cating the seeds of mischief. Tliough it is true that
down to a very late and terrible stage of disease medi-
cal science can command the means of cure, and none,
therefore, need despair, stOl the effect of these means is
proportionately slow or speedy, according to the pro-
gress which disease has made. Thus, there is no wis-
dom more sound than that implied in the axiom, that
"prevention is better than cure;" and as one of the
baneful characteristics of spermatic disorder is that it
is apt to make so much progress before the palient sus-
pects that he is ailing at all, it behooves all persons who
think they have reason to entertain any doubt of tlm



Importance of Examination.



233



nctual or probable state of theii* health, to conveit doubt
mto that certainty which will either calm their dis-
quietude where no real cause exists, or, if such causo
do exist, will place them on the road to cure. It ia
difficult to conceive how an honest and conscientious
jici-son, to whom doubts of the kind have occurred, can
venture to enter into the bonds of matrimony — can
ventm-e to make that solemn engagement on which
hinges the happiness or misery of his life and the lives
of others, without perlbrmiiig a duty so fraught with
the elements of comfort and safety. My province is
that of the physician, not of the theologian — my office
Ls the cure of bodies, not the cure of souls ; but here,
prudence, morality, a religious sense of duty, are so
identical with each other, that I do not trangress my
proper sphere when I submit the incumbency, on these
as well as other grounds, of doing that Avhicli prudence
dictates in connection with this grave subject. On its
peiformanee or uon-performance may often depend the
contingency of a wedded life of mutual contentment, or
of reciprocal repining, discord, and disgust; and further
than this, the question whether the oflspring of a mar-
riage are to enjoy purity of health, vigor of constitution,
and long and painless lives, or to present, on the other
hand, the pitiable spectacle of a set of poor, sickly,
ricketty, stunted, and debilitated creatures who, during
a short and unhappy life, merely " cumber the earth."

Perfect medical diagnosis is therefore all important
in cases of doubt as to the stability of health. But this
brings me to a point which involves some of the most
critical considerations incidental to the subject. I have
■Iready observed that the sympathy between the genital



S34



Mistakes of the Learned.



organs and the other portions of the system is so inti-
mate, that tliere is scarcely a^ symptom which can be
named but may be dependent upon the presence of
Spermatorrlioaa. To enumerate the symptoms alluded
to would be to enumerate nearly every kind and stage
of illness, mental or physical, with which the practitioner
can have to deal. The consequence of this is, that
where the latter, unfortunately for himself and his par
tient, has not Ireen adequately disciplined into the inves-
tigation of the circumstances which indicate the pres-
ence of Spermatorrhoea, he sets out on a wild-goose
search after a thousand other imaginary disorders, and
nothing is done to arrest the progress of the real one.

Having said thus much, I can add the further assur-
ance that if medical men can be induced to devote as
much time as I have done to the study in all its aspects,
of the most difficult, delicate, and complicated branch of
medical science, they will in course of time become
aware, as I am, of the reasons of the vast number of
failures which take place in the treatment of patients ;
of the enormous number of deaths, the true cause of
which is buried in mystery ; of the despair which is apt
to overtake the practitioner when he is unable to hit
upon the true source of a complaint, or having, a.s he
imagines, hit upon it, and applied the medicines which
he considers most applicable, discovers to his amazement
that they have inflamed instead of mitigated the symp-
toms. Before hoping to grapple successfully with the
evil, he must become perfectly master of the best means
of detecting it. A too general non-acquaintance with
the nature and mode of usinj the best agents of de-
tection is, in truth, the leading cause of that corapara-



Mistakes of the Learned.



235



1.1VO powerlessaess against disease, wliicli constitutes a
Btauding satire and reproach against tlie members of the
healing art generally. Of this I have already convinced
many of my professional friends, and I hope, as I pro-
ceed, to convince more still. I feel certain that in doing
BO I am pursuing the course best calculated to elevate
medicine from the position of a game of chance to
that of a .jcience ; to raise it to that height in public esti-
mation Ti'hich the talent, learning, and benevolence of
the majority of its members would qualify them to oc-
cupy, proTided, that, rising from the slough of prejudice
and obsolet\, routine, they would set about maldng the
best use of their accomplishments. Converts among
medical men diemselves are what are most to be desii-ed;
and though ulie present is essentially a jiopularly in-
structive woi K, and is purposely fi-ee from abstruse pro-
fessional technicalities, my trust is that it may not prove
wholly fruitless in making converts among -that impor-
tant class. No iay person, uninitiated in the mysteries
of the profession, will then be more smprised than the
physician and suigeon brought up under the system so
earnestly deprecated by Sir Astley Cooper, on discern-
ing the huge aggregate of loss of life, formerly attribu-
ted to complaints of the heart, complaints of the lungs,
complaints of the head, the stomach, the liver and what
not, but which will now be readily traceable to a cause
little known or understood even by the great Sir Astley
himself. That eminent man, whilst his perspicacious
mind enabled him to perceive that there was some-
thing radically wrong in the system upon which gener-
ative disorders were dealt with In his co mtry, lived
• few years too early to arrive at the whole truth, Qa



236



Mistakes of the Learnea.



mouraed a dire l)ut mysterious evil. Had liis life and
health bceu preserved to our day, he would, I doubt
not, prove hinisell" au efficient laborer in the gcod work
of removiug that ill-omened mystery.

Wliile impressing on my medical brethren the impor-
tance and duty of qualifying themselves in that which,
whilst the most difficult, has been the most neglected
branch of pathology, and, above all tluugs, of obtaining
a perfect knowledge of the means for ascertaining the
true nature of disease, I must warn them, in the name
of humanity, to take conscientious ciu-e that they do
not rush lightly or inconsiderately to the practical appli-
cation of those means. As nothing, for exiimple, affords
such a perfect indication as the microscope, for the de-
tection of the nature of inorbid urethral discharge,
when the instrument is wielded with consummate knowl-
edge of its properties, so nothing may lead to more dis-
astrous mistakes when not handled by the most acute
and painstaking intelligence. I have touched biielly,
but I trust sufficiently, on some of the descriptions ul
discharge, any one of whicli is so likely to be mistaken
for souie otlicr one requiring a wholly diflercnt treat-
ment. The microscope has removed the abstract prob-
ability of the danger, but has, at the same time, in coa-
scquence of the unskilful handling to which it is some- .
times subjected, increased the incidental probability
thereof. The danger in this case is referable to tlia
same principle by which chloroform, which, in the haudi
of skilful practitionets, is so great an auxiliary in tin
avoidimce of suderiug, when sm-gical operations of an
Intricate kind have been performed, becom&s so perilous
and sometimes so fJital an instrument when iguoranl



Pathological Failures, . 231



presumption perverts it from its right uses, or adminis-
ters it in excess, without making due allowance fot
variation in strength of constitution, etc. The attain-
ment of full experience in the use of the microscope for
purposes of medical diagnosis, like that of the proper
ise of chloroform in cases involving painful operations,
requkes, as I have observed, study and observation con-
tinued for many years, and supported by a large amount
of general medical knowledge ; and great are the re-
sponsibilities devolving on the man who, without such
qualifications, undertakes to use either the one or the
other. The importance of this remark is all the more
urgent, considering the total impossibility of adopting
any general rule of treatment cajiable of safe applica-
tion in diflTerent cases, even when the symptoms <ire ap-
parently most similar. Where Spermatorrhoea is actu-
ally present, (but be it remembered that the great task
is to discover when it is so,) there is, it is true, one
sound maxim to which I have already adverted, viz.,
that in nearly all affections of this particular kind, disor-
der of the testicles will in some way or other be indicat-
ed. But, on the other hand, as there are serious com-
plaints partaking of the external appearance of Sperma-
ton'hoea, but which do not necessarily present that
indication, the ordinary pratitiouer will be perplexed to
determine the exact nature of the malady. If he do
attempt to determine it, so manifold and complex are
the modifications which are prcsentc;d, that the chances
are ten to one that he wholly fails; and more probably
Btill, should he tamper with that which, under the eye o1
skill and experience, is tlie most efficient of all detectiyo
and indicative agencies.



238



Morbid Complications,



When, again, the presence of Spermatoirhoea luu
been ascertained beyond the possibility of doubt, though
it may usually be accepted as pretty certain that there is
disorder in the testicles, complicated with the unhealthy
emission of seed, the varieties of disorder to which the
last-named organ is subject are in their turn so numer-
ous that I could mention not less than twenty distinct
classes of disease of this kind, every one of which re-
quires its separate course of treatment ; but which, with-
out minute and careful analysis, cannot be distinguished
from each other. It would fill a corpulent volume to
recapitulate, in the most superficial manner, the symi>-
toms of these various aflections of the testicles alone,
and many of which may or may not exist in accompa-
niment with Spermatorrhoea, though the latter does not
as a general rule exist unless some specific disorder in
the testicles is in active operation. So sensitive is the
organ subject to the multitude of derangements alluded
to, and so very similar in appearance are some of these
aflections, tliat it would probably be moderate to afiirm
that iu no department of analysis are serious and irre-
trievable errors more likely to be committed. It must
be remarked that erroneous treatment of disorder in the
testicles, even when not intimately connected with
Spermatorrhoea, has frequently led to fatal disease in
parts of the system so distant as the 'spine and head.
This circumstance, of which examples are found by the
thousand in medical annals, suggests the danger of at-
tempting to tamper with so delicate an organ, save
where all the symptomatic circumstances of the case
»re clearly defined in the mind of the practitioner.

I have more than once made allusion to the danger



Morbid Complications.



239



which exists that Spermatorrhoea may be mistaken for
other disorders, such as disease of the heart, lungs,
liver, or stomach, the symptoms having in many cases
a close outward afUnity with such affections, but being
in reality connected witli some of the various phases of
development in which the seminal disarrangement ex-
hibits itself. Through such misconceptions of the nature
of the malady fatal consequences too often ensue ; and
this circumstance furnishes another proof of the import-
ance of minute and particular acquaintance with the
means of detection.

A very distress-ing train of evils arises where the
practitioner, unpossessed of adequate knowledge of the
indications of seminal disorder, and unable to discover
iny tangible cause to account for the mental and
physical prostration of the patient, ascribes all to mere
fancy and imagination, and endeavors to persuade the
applicant that in order to be well he has only to think
himself so. Friends and acquaintances are gi'avely
told that it is all whim and nonsense ; that there is no
real disease; that they must make light of the sufl'erer's
complaiiits. Now it is, doubtless, very advisable to
keep up his courage. A cheeiing word, uttered at the
right time, may, as a collateral help, have a good efl'ect;
but disastrous are the results when a mere " placebo,"
or soother, is substituted for active measures of cure.
On the errors committed by medical men, in ascribing
to " fancy," or hypocliondna, disorders in which actual
Organic or functional lesion is present, an eminent writei
has the following pregnant remarks :

" Ii is in vain that we say to the so-called hypochon-
driac — amuse yourself, employ your mind, go into



>



240



Medical Errors.



society, seeic agreeable conversation; so long as we
have not removed the cause of his disorder he is un-
able to profit by our counsels. How can we expect
tliat when a man is fatigued by tlie least exercise lio
Bhall occupy himself with walking or gardening? How
can we desire liim to go into society, when the simple
presence of a woman intimidates him, and recalls all
his former misfortuu'^s ? How can we expect him to
enjoy conversation whea he loses its thread every mo-
ment — when his memory leaves him, and when he
feels his nullity? We {-ersuade him to seek amuse-
ments and pleasures; but are they such to him? Is
not the happiness of oth«r^ his greatest punishment?
Because he is xmable to follow our advice, we accuse
him of unwillingness, and wo wir.h to compel him. Bui
let us first remove the cause of our patient's disease,
and we may then hope that his "haracter and conduct
will cliange, and that he will i'eturn to his natural
taste? and habits."

Such is the language of scicD-c and philanthropic
philosophy, as distinguished from tlio dull presumption
of the species of knowledge which Is only of routine
and tradition. Its appositeness to th*^ present subject
is peculiar, because nineteen out of twenty cases, whicii
are loosely classed as nervousness, hypochondriasis,
whimsicality, etc., are mere exhibitions of one of tlie
symptoms of Spermatorrlia:'a, one of tJie peculiarities of
which, it will be remembered, is to proceed contimiously
from bad to worse, — tliis downward progress, instead
of tendency towards improvement, being a special cliar-
act(u-istic of the disciise. Where seminal weakness, ip
»ny of its stages, is detected, nothing but energctio



Means of Cure.



241



ti-eattnenl, in wlilcli activity must be combined witb
profound caution at every step, can by any possibility
produce improvement. Mere "Ilygeinic" prescrip-
tions, whicli consist of advice Oiat migbt do very wtll
for persons in sound liealth, may in such cases be often
rather mischievous than otherwise, because they are ai)t
to give rise to deceptive expectations, the inevitable dis-
appointment of which is accompanied by most depress-
ing reaction.

The debility and imi^otence consequent on the ad-
vanced stages of Spermatorrhoea or seminal weakness
liave elicited from tlie same authority from whom I
have already made a short extract, a lew observations
on the question of marriage, so pregnant with good
counsel to medical men that I cannot resist the temp-
tation to quote them. The author is supposing that a
visible improvement has been experienced, and con-
tinues : —

" It is not long in such cases before we are cmliarassed
by questions about the propriety of marriage being put
to us. This is a matter which is sei ious in all its as-
pects, and on which the least scrupulous should not
pronounce without having had sufficient assurances ol
their patient's return to health. The question of our
patient's health is now not the only one, nor is oven
his future happiness alone implicated; the fate of the
innocent being who is about to be associated with
him is the matter of chief importance, and justice to
her demands that we do not counsel matrimony until
after sufficiently long proof that re-establishment is
permanent."

Little more need be added tha'i that the moral o/



242



Cure for Body and Mind.



this passage is equally applicable to children as to
wife. The offspring of a person who has contracted
matrimony whilst laboring under infirmity, or who,
after marriage, is atUxcked by disease, being for the
most part victims of ill-bcalth and deformity daring the
continuance of their brief lives. And it applies witi
nc , less dij-ectness to the sta^e of the married who hav*
been uncertain as to their condition, than to that of the
tuuuarried. In all such cases, pfh(!ther of doubt or ol
disorder, already incurred, individvU examination, con-
ducted by one capalile of entering into every phase o'
the applicant's state, is the one tiling recessary *.o lit
safety and case of mind. It is by such m«ans ('nc'ui'
ing the conditions which I have specified,) that dangc»
can, with certainty, be averted, and actual evil, wbcw
it exists, be di iven back from its fell career.



Treatmeyit of Spermatorrlweau 248



SECTION vm,

AEKEBAI. BEMAEKS ON THE TREATMENT OF BPEB-
MATOERHCEA, SEMINAL WEAKNESS, AlfD
IMPOTENCE.

It is the duty of a cultivated and well-intentioiwd
medical adviser, who addi-esses himself more partica-
larly to non -professional readers relative to the treats
ment of disease, to warn them against hesitation and
timidity in applying to a competent person who devotes
unweariedly his time, thoughts, and energies to one
class of disorders, and so gains an amount of knowledge
and experience from the number of cases constantly
presenting themselves that mere general practitioners
cannot have tbe opportunity of obtaining.

Apart from those whose self-neglect amounts to cul-
pability, tliere exists a class of patients who gather a
Binattering of knowledge as to symptoms, and at the same
time a fearfid amount of error and delusion, from some
empirical work, which lauds one medicine or appllca-'
tion as the universal remedy for a number of disorders,
variable as the climates and seasons, undergoing aller-
Dtions marked as the change from sunshine to shade.
Self-opinion and want of knowledge ever march hand
in hand, and the amate\ir self-constituted doctor, by his
sage treatment ol" himself or his friend, increases seri-



244



Treatment of Spermatotr/ma.



otisly the diOiculllos with which the regular practitioner
has to coiitead, whenever the time anives for (Uscover-
ing the trutli of the tr'te old adage, "Whoever haa
himself for a client has a fool for his adviser."

The mischief that arises from this absm-d seUViuackery
by persons not professionally educated, induces me
more as a duty than with the hope of its suppression,
to declaim against it; for altliough most men in a legal
dilemma apply to their lawyer, and in cases of sickness
in the_ lower order of valuable animals the best veteri-
narian is consulted, regardless of expense, j'et the very
man who has acted with caution and Judgment in both
or either of the matters named, will, when his own
health, happiness, and even lite are at stake, tamper
with all, and very probably in the end succeed in ruin-
ing his constitution from the delusion of overweenmg
self-conceit. There are individuals who indulge tlie
fond yet irrational hope that nature is capable of re-
suming, without assistance, her lost powers. To such
I can only say that the time which is wasted in this
delay is precious and irrecoverable, and can only tend
to perpetuate the predicament of bopeless imbecility,
and render Impotence pernanent. Many of them are
prevented from applying for medical advice and assist-
ance through fear or dread of accidental exposure. In
reference to this it is proper to remark that my general
rule is to burn all correspondence, or to return it to
the loriters on the termination of their cast ; and only
under peculiar circumstances is a personal interview rtt
application absolutely necessary. It would ha\e been a
matter of no dilhculty to nje to dctjiil the liistories ol
hundreds of cas-^s which have bccji treated most sue



Urinary Indications.



cessfuDy, in wliiclitlie most deplorable forms of Nervous
and Generative Debility, Impotence, Sterility, Nocturnal
and Diurnal Emissions, Seminal Weakness, Indigestion,
SypMlitic and constitutional diseases, have been ex-
changed for health, vigor, and haj^pincss. But this
would have augmented the size of the work most in-
<3onveniently ; and there are many whose delicacy wou'd
resent the transcript of their cases, even under anony-
T.ous initials.

Many symptoms of a character similar to those of
Spermatorrhoea may supervene on some aflectiou of the
Kidney, Ureter, Bladder, Rectum, Prostate, or some
portion of the Urethra not immediately connected with
the outlet of the seminal duct ; and so intimate is the
connection of these adjacent parts through their nerv-
ous and arterial supply, that sympathetic alfections of
one or more constantly arise when the primary and
often more serious disease is quietly committing its
ravages in the neighborhood.

Want of perception as to the relations of the parts
affected in their manifold communications and sympa-
thies, has induced the baneful or efl'ete modes of treat-
ment employed by some physicians, where the choice
has fallen either on violent and injurious applications,
or on a single drng of no effect whatever, puffed up,
praised, and advertised, with i-omantic cases plentifully
appended, to dazzle the uneducated, excite curiosity in
the thoughtless, and false hopes in the invalid, while
contemptuous pity and scorn are created in every right-
thinking and feeling breast.

Let me repeat how essential it is for every invalid to
place himself entirely in the hands of his medical at>



W6 True Principles of Treatment



tendant, aud to blot out forever from his memory thai
deadly illusion, " adf-irmtment." Experience auiplj
warrants me hi staLuig that it ought to be termed, "se//
injury," for by it simple cases are rendered complicated,
aud intricate diseases well nigh permanently incurable

A comprehensive view of Spermatorrhoea and its ac-
companying affections, mental aud physical, leads me
to divide the principles of its treatment into,

1st. Local ANB Constitutional;

2d. Moral and Dietetic.

The first is the entire province of the physician, who,
only in the last necessity, seeks the co-operation of his
patient. Moral improvement depends wholly on the
firmness and perseverance of the sufferer.

A Local remedy of great viUue is the use of Cold
Water, and this may be favorably applied over the whole
body by river and sea-bathing, also to the region of the
loins, and directly to the exterior of the Testicles. Part
of the nerves supplying the genito-m'inary system pass
from the Cauda Equina low down in the pelvis, others
may be traced back in the spinal maiTOw for some dis-
tance, and tlie cold should be used sufficiently high up
for application over their origin, as the most likely
method of giving " tone and power," both of which we
seek to impart.

An enfeebled condition of the scrotum causes the
testicle to drag on the spermatic cord more than it
ought to do; so in very many instances a scientifically
adapted and properly applied susjjensory bandage pos-
sesses DO small cjegree of comfort and utility

The action of cold on the scrotum canscs a muscla
which forms one coat that, purse {and is termed the



True Principat of Treatment.



247



dartos,) to contract its fl'/res, and afford more healfliful
support than would otherwise be gained. Useful and
simple as these applications are, some patients cannot
at first bear them, and require to commence M'ith a
higher temperature, and so gradually proceed to general
immersion and the use of shoM'er-baths. Where salt
water is not proem-able, a small quantity of buy salt
may be substituted.

Coarse toiveUing or flesh hrushes should be used aftei
the bath ; for the skin is not only an extensive and high-
ly sensitive structure, but takes no insignificant part in
the vital process of respiration.

An embrocation applied along the region of the spine
is useful in the earlier stages ; but when disease is more
confirmed I have recourse to shoclvs of electricity or
galvanism, of course taking care to regulate their power
in proportion to the strength of the recipient.

Dry cupping over the dorsal and lumbar regions
should not be omitted; it consists in applying the glasses
only, without using the scarificator or lancet blades.

Blisters, either fluid or plaster, when judiciously
used, are very valuable appliances; safe and easy of
adaptation, they can be speedily healed, or by dressing
with proper material, continued more or less open, ac-
cording to the medical directions. The best position for
applying them is generally either the dorsal lumbar, or
sacral regions ; sometimes, however, the course, of the
Spermatic coj-d between the two rings on the face of
the abdomen, may be very properly selected. My testi-
mony is decidedly in their favor as valuable allies in this
class of inflrmilies, particularly in very obstinate cases,
accompanied by seminal emissions, which resist all 1d«



248



Medical and Dietetic.



ternal remedies. In such instances I have generally
found the blister, wlien applied to the perineum, (that
portion of the body behind the testicles,) to be highly
c{Bca(uous.

Co7npressioii of the testis should not be omitted.
Wlien applied by the physician in an effective manner, it
directly and mechanically supports the vessels of tlie
epididymis, and, by assisting tha tunica albuginea, tends
to prevent greater relaxation of the secreting body ol
the testicle. Men of the highest professional rank will
bear testimony to the favorable action of this remedy, in
chronic and even acute forms of inflammation in the
organ, and to the simplicity of its adaptation and re-
moval.

The proposed limits of this work would be far ex-
ceeded by a continuation of the topical remedies which
the medical man has at command; his practised eye
alone can guide the patient as to which one is most
applicable to the individual train of symptoms under
consideration ; and as scarcely any two case* are ex-
actly similar in their minute details, it is wise and ra-
tional to conclude that in order to be effective the
curative means must be varied also.

A sketch only of the medicinal or constitutional treat-
ment can be offered ; for the wide-spread ramiflcationa
of the senso-motor and sympathetic nerves, bring into a
Btate of functional disorder, not only organs situated
near each other, but tliose which are at a distance, as
the brain, lungs, heart, and stomach, all intimately con-
nected by means of the pneumo-gastric nerves ; henco
the palpitations, difficult and excited respiration, head-
•che, floating bodies appearing before the eyes, &G,



Tnie Principlet^ of Treatment.



249



so fi'e(]aeutly accompanying different stages of Sper-
matorrlicca, and alluded to at great length by some
writers. Any complications of these or other kinda
will meet with due attention if looked on as tlie out
posts, to be treated in their tui'n, while the physician
continues to employ his main strength on the citadel or
Btrongliold of tlie enemy.

The class of drugs which allay excitement and irrita-
bility are the first likely to be required ; for. the stomach,
80 weakened and capricious that the whole complaint
s frequently confounded with indigestion, demands our
first attention, in order that it may receive and assimi-
late the medicines and food uecessai-y for a permanent
curative effect.

Mild and cordial laxatives, alterative drugs with
neutral salts, febrifuges and sedatives, will soon quiet
the system and enable it to tolerate tonic or restorative
medicines. If the last are indiscriminately commenced
with, all the evils augment, and time is in the end losL
Nc word in medical phraseology is more misappro-
priated than " tonic." One man means iron ; another,
quinine ; a thu'd, mineral acids ; whilst a fourth means
stimulants or irritative preparations, which have no
real action suitable to the term; and so on, tliiough the
eutij-e Pharmacopoeia.

Now, I mean not any one, but the whole class oj
medicines, legitimately so termed, which must be culled
and combined to meet each case, clianged and increased
according only to their effect, in which consists the real
art of scientific prescribing. One man gradually gath-
ers strength from quinine, wiiicli would nut suit an-
r-ther, whose deteriorated blood globules will becoraa



250



Medical and Dietetic.



red and hejilthy under the exliibitiou of iroa, in sonw
of its numerous preparations.

Perse ver'iuce and steadiness in obeying tlie directions
laid down for liim are incumbent on tlie patient, who
should bear in mind that carelessness or excess may
counteract the meilicinal benefit he could not other-
wise fail to receive.

A great coadjutor in the work of restoration is a
roundly-based and well-followed dietetic regimen, wliich
itnay be gently hinted at in the next place.

In the irritable stage, from the condition of the sto-
aiach, very little in the y.'ay of diet can be borne,
conipared to the hearty meals afterwards partaken of,
when the tonics are acting powerfully and well. Care-
fully prepared bi'oths, flavored only, not highly sea-
soned, may be administered. Next come small poi tions of
lean meat; and, finally, all those articles of food which
contain most nutrition in the least space, giving the
system support, and, as it were, nursing the powers of
digestion. The palate, too, may be consulted, so that
nothing injurious is fancied.

AVithout usurping the prerogative of cot)ks, who aro
somewhat despotic in their rule, let me warn patients
that it is essential to procure, in the soup or broth, idl
the oitinazome, or red particles of the meat, and this ia
best done by cutting it into small pieces, and very grad-
ually extracting the required material by placing the
meat in a flat covered dish placed in an oven only heated
BufHciently to sinnner the water.

A generous but not stimulating diet may be adopted,
and the patient can select fish, shell-fish, eggs, poultry,
and meat at pleasure.



Medical cmd i)ietefic.



2&1



Warm relaxing drinks, sucli as tea, coffee, &c., areinr
)urious, and tlieir place may be supplied by new milk,
where the stomach does not revolt at it ; nearly all fruits
and vegetables, lemon, vinegar, peppers, &c., should bo
avoided.

As to stimulating fliiids, good old wine, genuine tran-
Jy, or rum of a proper age, may be prescribed in medi-
cinal quantities, but not for unlimited use ; every undue
Btinuilus causes a weakening reaction. Malt liquors oi
a perfect quality and well regulated quantity, are valua-
ble tonics ; but their administration, together with a more
co]iious digest of rules, applicable to each person and
period, must remain under the sole control of one more
experienced tlian tlie invalid.

Most happily for humanity, there are not many causes
wliich render impotence permanent; but organic disease
or injury to the cerebellum may cause it. I witnessed an
interesting case, some years ago, in a soldier, formerly of
General Hooker's brigade.

Obliteration of both vasa defercntia, accidental defi-
ciency or excessive congenital smallness of the penis
must natiu-ally and hopelessly confirm the state of impo-
tence.

I will say only a few words on moral treatment. Vice
is more easily acquired than eradicated. Those who
owe their diseased condition to a continuation of their
own fault, I would entreat to seek a state of corporeal
health, which may give them sufBcient mental flrmnesi
to conquer tlieir evil propensities.

Marriage (which every man deems a blessing,) cannot
without reference to feelings of affection and prudence
be recommended as a remedy for the sick ; the happineeg



252



The Author's Principles.



of both parties depciuls on its results, and an unfortu.
nate or ill-advised connection of the sexes, i^ai ticularly
arising from physical causes, can only aid in " multiply-
ing misery by two." One victim is more than society
can spare. Let all remember in good time the truthful
Latin jjroverb, " Gutto cavat lapidem non vi sed saBpe
cadendo," — " The drop of water hollows the stone, not
by the. force, but by frequency of its falling."

The peculiarity of my treatment consists in the selec-
tion of hitherto undiscovered I'einedies, and in the prac-
tical adaptation and apjjllcation of those we heretofore
possessed. To act directly upon the seminal vessels,
and to impart tone, without the production of irritation ;
to strengthen without inllaming or temporarily exciting
tlie generative power ; to renovate, by the exhibition of
remedies which cure, by the removal of the proximate
cause of debility and disease, and so permanently restore
the lost energies of the system, — this is the mode of
jjractice which in my hands has been signally suc-
cessful.

It will be a substantial service to society if the
reader who has attentively, and I hope usefully, i)e-
r'^sed these pages, will forward, under envelope, anony-
mously or otherwise, this little work to such of his
friends or acquaintances who, as he may have reason
either to know or suspect, have been the secret victims
of the baneful habit I have alluded to. In this M'ay a
parent may secretly, yet efl'ectually, warn that child to
whom on such a subject he would feel it repulsive to
speak. I need only point out this mode of performing
a humane and charitable action, to render obvious its
very uscl'ul aiiplication.



The Authors Principles.



263



It is evident that in a work ol' thi.s nature it is abso-
lutely necessary to cite a few cases cautiously, as de-
Bcriptive of the character and variety of those sufl'erings
for which I am ordinarily consulted. This is done with
care, and no other or further publicity need be feared
by those who have already consulted me, or may in
fulure place themselves under my treatment. I have
thus endeavored to explain the purpose of the present
effort, — to offer an intelligent portraiture of the inter-
ruptions to the ei^oj'ment of sexual health, and by
explaining the causes in a simple, forcible and per-
spicuous manner, to enable the I'eader to disentangle
the apparently inextricable and confused maze of his
own wandering and diseased lancies, — to point to the
concealed and, it may be, unsusi)ected cause of human
suffering, and to the restoration of health, prisUne vigor,
usefulness, activity, and joyous hilarity. " Why do I
suffer? — why, when all around me invites to enjoy-
ment ? Wliy is it that, while every face wears a smile,
existence is to me a dreary blanlc, — the world, its
[)leasures, cares, and duties an irksome weariness?"
Are not these questions which even a cursory glance at
the previous pages will enable the misguided to solve?
Requiring no name (if my patient be desirous to con-
ceal it,) I am enabled to afford relief without even
knowing the parties who receive it at my hands; and
this certainty of concealment is to many a gi'eat satis-
faction. Neverthless it is unnecessary, for on no oc-
casion has the slightest suspicion ever been excited.
Inviolable secrecy and certain relief are the boons,
then, I offer to suffcrimj humanity.

That I have these in my power to Ijcstow, number-



264 InvioldUe Secrecy and Certalrf Eelief.

less cases sufficiently attest. I make no pretensions
but such as are borne out by the fullest testimonies;
and of tlie authenticity of these testimonies I am pre-
pared to give every proof short of a disclosure of the
confidence entrusted to me. FeeUng sensible that from
tlie absence of information in other legitimate cliannels
many errors are committed through ignorance, and
many evils endured through shame, this litUt work is
tendered, accompanied with the hope that its useful-
ness may not be diminished by any misintA.-pretalion
of my real motives. For the satisfaction of the reader
a few illustrative cases are appended; and to those who
are sufleriiig from any of the consequences resulting
fi'om solitary habits or excess, a reference to the Notice
to Patients at the end of the volume, will point out the
method to be adopted, by which the alleviation and curt
of such cousequeuces may be effected



Bemarks of the Press.



266



A. FKW OF THE MANY EXTRACTS IN MT POSSESSION
FBOM THE LEADING NEWSPAPERS AND MEDICAL
JOURNALS OF THE COUNTRY.

(From the Chicago Medical Journal, June, 1867.)

The flistin^xnished and able Dr. Hayes, Vice President
of the Cohiinbia College of Physicians and Surgeons,
arrived in our city last evening. We understand that
the doctor is on his way to the Kocky Mountains,
whither he is journeying for the benefit of his health
which has becoiTie so impaired by arduous professional
labors as to render this recreation inipciative. He has
accepted an invitation from the Faculty of the Union
Medical College to deliver a course of a few lectures.
Thi.s will ofler a rare opportunity for our physicians
and students to listen to the instructions of one of
our greatest and most experienced professors.

(From the St. Louis Republican, June 26, 1857.)

Distinguished Arrival. — The distinguished Dr.
A. H. Hayes, of Boston, arrived ia this city last
evening.

(From the St. Louis Medical Review.)

Dr. Albert H. Hayes, of Boston, is on a brief visit
to this part of the country to recruit his exhausted
physical strength, which has become somewhat
prostrated by increasing professional labors. Of
nil phvticians of the present dny there are none
who sustain a higher character or so large a share
of public confldence as Dr. Hayes.



266



Remarks of the Press.



(From the Louisville Journal, July 7, 1867.J

Dr. A. H. H.ayes, who lectured at the Apollo last
evenuig, is undoubtedly the most instructive and elo-
quent lecturer in the United States upon physiology
and health. The people of St. Louis were so dcliglileil
with him, they induced him to deUver tliree courses of
lectures. Every lectiu-e was listened to with the most
prolbund attention by more than two thousand people,
and hundreds were nightly comiielled to go away
unable to get even standing room within hearing o/
the doctor's voice.

(From the Toronto, C.W., Medical Times.)

Dr. Hayes, of Boston, who has become so distinguished
throughout the enlightened world by his success in
the treatment of diseases of a delicate nature, has just
C(jmpleted a highly instructive course qf lectures belore
tlie Medical Faculty at the Queen's Medical College in
this city. These lectures were delivered to large gath-
erings of medical men exclusively, and have greatly
enlightened our minds upon the nature aud pro])er
trealmcut of all private diseases. At the close of his
last lecture, last Tuesday aflcrnoon, F. Kamsbotham,
President of the College, was Cixlled to the chau-, and
resolulious of the mostJl al tering character were unaiai-
niously passeil by over three hundred of the very best
j)liysicians in Canada West, of which the following is
ii specimen:

licHolve.d, That we have listened with unfeigned de-
light and interest to the lectures delivered by Dr.
Hayes, and brought to a close this day, and that wo
deem it an act of justice to him and the Faculty of the
Unilcd States to thus express our appreciation of his
high cliiuacler, his great ability, and his wonderful
powers ol" illustrating his subject.

Bbwlved, That a committee of three be appointed by
the cliair to lender Dr. Hayes the thanks of this Medical
Sf)ciety for his uniform courtesy to the members in af-
foi'ding lii(!m every facility for obtaining information
upou tiie subject of his lectures, and that he be requested



JRoitarka of Ihc Press.



261



to deliver additional lectures at this College at tlia
earliest ijeriod consisteut with his otlicr eiigagcniciits.

George L. Somers, M. D. )

Henry T. Lyman, M. D. > Committee.

Ehubin H. McCarty, M. 1). )

George L. Someks, Secretary.
Toronto, C.W„ July 23, 1867.

(From the Evening Traveller.)

Dr. Hayes, No. 4 Bulfinch Street, astonishes all by
Lis wonderful success in curing diseases. The facility
with which he raises the prostrate frame, invigorates it
with new life, and charms it Avith bright ^.ope, is the
mystery and admiration of the hour. His method of
examination, liis deep insight into disease, his profound
knowledge of the materia m.edica, are all proverbial.
Where others practice at hap-hazard and in the dark,
he seems to trtiid in the light of certainty, and as a
consequence conquers disease. All shonld consnlt him
who wish for a speedy cure and thorough advice, for
Dr. Hayes lias had the most remaikable and gratifying
success.

(From the Daily Journal.)

Db. a. H. Hay'es. — This renowned physician, whose
bold and enlightened treatment of many of the most
formidable disea.ses with which the human family is
aftlictcd is as remarkable as it is gratifying, is constantly
thronged with those seeking for hcallli and its con-
comitant blessings. He pHisscssess a powerful and
masterly mind, and his snccess is the most giatifying.
Go to him, ye that are sick, and be healed.

(From llie Morning Tost.)

To TiiK Afilictku. — Avoid all qnack or advertised
remedies for any disease, especially venei eal, and all the
I'lsUuments advertised to cure seminal emissions, as
they are injurious quack humbugs; but go to Dr.
Hayes, No. 4 liulfiuch St., Corposite Kevere House,)



888 Testimonial from Dr. Conover.



Boston, He ia a skilful pbysician, and his elegant
apaj tments are so aiTauged as to have all consultations
strictly private.

A letter from the distinguished Dr. Alexander Cono-
ver, Medical Inspector in the United States army :



A noble benefactor Is Dr. Hayes. He reaches the
very l oots and vitals of disease, and is e.iabled to apply
thorough remedies. Thousands of apparently hoj)eles3
cases whifli have been given up by other eminent
medical men have been speedily cured by Dr. Hayes,
aiid have borne grateful evidence of the skiU 4ud learn-
ing of this renowned physician.



The preceding letter was addressed by Dr. Conover
to W. A. Hammond, then Surgeon lir<j»tr»l in th«
United States Army.



Washington, D. C,




Alex. Conover, M D,,

Medical Inspeci*)r U. S. A.



Certificates. 269



CERTIFICATES.



By way of conclusion to this volume, the author is
gratified to be able to place before his multitudinous
readers a number of certificates and testimonials
of his success in the cure of nervous diseases fi'om
grateful patients residing in different parts of the
country. These testimonials have been unsolicited,
and are such tributes as would be flatteiing even to
the most distinguished members of the medical pro-
fession. Naturally enough, patients who liaVe been
cured of the most depressive class of ailments and
ills to whicHi flesh is heir are somewhat warm in
their expressions of gratitude towards their medical
benefactor. The writer could fill a volume with au-
thentic testimonials of a similar nature. Many of
these testimonials are from prominent and influen-
tial persons in the various localities in which they
reside, — from persons, in short, in all avocations
of life.



An Almost Hopeless Case of Nervous Disease,

PEEPEOT OUEE.-A QEATEIUL TEailHOUIAL.

Boston, May, 1873.

In June of the year 1865 the undersigned went to
California and took charge of a lar^^e mining inter-
est, in which his own fortunes, as well as those of
several friends, were largely involved. The interest
was in litigation, and for a year and a half was un-
der the constant strain of intense mental anxiety,
to say nothing of incessant bodily activity. My
management was successful; but at the end of a



270



Certificates.



year and a half I found myself completely prostrated
and broken down ])y excessive mental and bodily
exertion. I was, in fact, the subject of one of tlic
most serious Ibrnis of nervous disease, caused, I
was told by the medical authorities, by congestion
of the base of the brain.




AliE.KANDEU JC. RATTT.



Certificates.



271



To be thus suddenly arrested in the very midst of
a lucrative audmost promising enterprise, just when
I had reached blue water, as it were, and all difficul-
ties had been overcome and doubts of success had
been dispelled, — to be arrested, I say, at such an
interesting juncture by an alarming nervous afl'ec-
tion, which completely incapacitated me for any
mental or bodily exertion whatever, was sufficiently
discouraging and disheartening. It was like drown-
ing, not only in sight of land, but with one's clutch
on the shore. It was useless to struggle. I was
obliged to succumb ; and by advice of my friends,
I went reluctantly East to Philadelphia, where I was
placed under the care of a most prominent physi-
cian. At this time my memory failed me, and I had
lost the perceptions of taste, touch, and smell. My
left side was paralyzed. I was constantly tormented
by hallucinations and gloomy forebodings as well as
by incessant pain, so that a nurse at my side was a
necessity that could not be dispensed with by night
or day.

As I showed no symptoms of recovery, I was
taken to Saratoga, that a physician resident there,
who was somewhat celebrated for his treatment of
nervous affections, might be consulted. Perhaps,
also, it was thought that the mineral waters might
be beneficial. I remained six months at Saratoga,
not only without amendment of my health, but I had
grown worse instead of better.

Matters had now become so serious that immedi-
ate recourse to the best medical advice and ability
to be found in the city of New York was deemed
the best step. I was soon under the care of the
most noted specialist in nervous disease in the com-
mercial metropolis. After a course of treatment in
which electricity formed a prominent feature, my
friends were notified that my case was hopeless.
There was life left in me, it is true, but the verdict
was that there was no hope. Henceforth I was to



272



Certificates.



be a burden to myself and my friends until death
came to my relief.

At this critical point an Eastern gentleman, who
had business with one of my friends in New York,
happened to be informed of my hopeless condition.
He called to see me, and sti-ongly advised that I
should be taken to Boston for a personal interview
with Dr. Hayes, the consulting pliysician of the
Peabody Medical Institute in that city. He was
told that I had been taken from place to place for
medical treatment several times already without
receiving the least advantage, and that another re-
moval to a distant point would probably result in
another failure to obtain relief, and would therefore
be worse than useless. But the Eastern gentleman,
being of a sanguine temperament, would not give
my case up so, and finally prevailed upon those who
had me in charge to take me to Boston.

After a careful examination of ray case, Dr. Hayes
said that he could aftbrd me partial relief, but he did
dot speak encouragingly in regard to a permanent
cure. Under no circumstances, the doctor informed
me, could I expect much mitigation of my sufferings
from his treatment in a less time than at the end of
six weeks. Even partial relief was worth more
than a six months' stay in Boston, to say nothing of
six weeks. Suffice it to say that I found myself at
once subjected to a new treatment, entirely difl'erent
fi'om anything which I had experienced at the hands
of my previous medical advisers. It began to tell
on ray shattered nerves at once, working like a
charra.

At tlie end of two weeks the gentleman who had
originally advised my recourse to the doctor, called to
see rae in ray new quarters, and under my new treat-
ment. Sensation had already begun to returu to my
left side. I was recovering the use of ray lost senses,
and warmth and motion were taking the place of
partial paralysis. The gentleman gave me a look,



Certificates.



273



which said louder than words, " I told you there
was hope and cure for you." In fact, I felt health
dawning anew in me. With returning strength came
hope and confidence, which reinforced the treatment
and medicine wonderfully. The doctor acknowl-
edged that he had underestimated the recuperative
power of my system.

At the end of the six weeks, which he had mentioned
as the earliest date of even a partial recovery, he
assured me of a perfect cure. His assurances were
made good by the event. I am, at the date of this
writing, a well man and have been for several years.
Indeed, my present occupation requires vigorous
health, and I am fully equal to it. I frequently
indulge in gymnastic exercises, and am noted for
muscular strength. During my illness my weight,
which is now from 175 to 200, fell to 120 pounds. I
am induced to write this letter by a sense of duty to
others who are suffering as I sufl'ered. It was this
sense of duty, combined with a feeling of intense
personal regard for my healer and benefactor. Dr.
Hayes, which has prompted me, unsolicited, to pen
these lines as a guide to all prostrated with severe
nervous disease. I refer to Adjutant-General Cun-
ningham and Judge Abbott, who are personal
acquaintances.

Any person desirous of making fhrther inquiry
can do so by addressing me, in care of Horace Dodd,
No. 265 Washington Street, Boston.

Alexander E. Raitt.

Suffolk, ss.

August 16, 1873.
Then personally appeared the above-named Alex-
ander E. Raitt, and made oath that the above state-
ment by him subscribed is true.
Before me,

T. F. Nutter,

Justice of the Peace.



274



Certificates.



CASE XL.

Dr. Hayes:

I improve this opportunity to inform you that you
have perfectly cured ine of Syphilis. I was under
the care of three different quacks in Boston for al-
most four years. Three months ago I was recom-
mended to yon, and now, thank God, that through
him you have saved me from a lingering, disgusting
desease, and awful death.

W. L. G.

Melrose, Mass., June 18, 18G3.

CASE XLI.

Dr. Hayes, No. 4 Bulflnch Street, Boston.
My Dear Sir :

Nearly two years ago I contracted chancre (pox),
and after bothering with several incompetent, self-
styled doctors, none of whom afl'orded me the
slightest relief from the loathsome ulcers with
which I was covered, I applied to you. In six
weeks afterward I was entirely restored to health,
and have never been better in my life than since
then.

J. K. L.

East Boston, May 14, 1863.

CASE C.

Haverhill, Mass., )
- . • Dec. 16, 1867. 5

My Dear Doctor:

Accept ray gratitude and homage to your skill. I
assure you it gives me infinite pleasure to report
pi'ogress in accordance with your request. It Ls



Certificates.



275



now just four weeks since I commenced taking your
medicine. Tlie niglit l^eforc I corameuced taking it
I had an emission, and liad been having about one a
week. / have had but one since I commenci d your
treatment, and that was just three weeks ago.

The very first time I took your medicine I felt its
taeueflcial effect. I now feel so well, so happy, so
full of joyous spirit, that I am like a holiday school-
bo.y. I assure you, doctor, that my health and
strength are wonderfully increased; my duties, so
tiresome before, are now light and easy; I work
hard and never become wearied. In short, I have
latftiy ifelt that life is a pleasure. Each day I have
felt better.

My friends are sui'prised to see me so well, so
strong. I am most sanguine of future health and
strength.

I thought the emission would never occur again.
However the last one was only slight, but I felt
weak in the knees, and felt exhausted all the next
d£iy, but it went off, and I felt well and strong, and
stilt.continue so. The penis has assumed a much
larger appearance, and is more vigorous ; it has not
thvLbflabbiness, feels warm, and never clammy.

I have rigidly adhered to your rules and advice ;
the thick, white matter does not now escape with
my urine. / am surprised to see how fast I gain.

Will the emission stop altogether? Will it injure
my health to get married in twelve months' time?

I already hail you as my regenerator.
■ " Your Obedient Servant,

T. M. C.

The author is constantly receiving letters, of
which the preceding are an example, from Ills
patients in all parts of the country. •



276



CertificateM.



West Chelmsford, Feb. 25, 1873.
Doctor Hayes:

Dear Sir, — Yours of yesterday is at hand, and
with pleasure I^vould hasten to reply. •When I first
visited you one year ago last January (1872), I was
a used-up man, both mentally and physically, and it
was with much pain and suflering that I performed
my daily labor, and my nervous system was in a
very bad condition. It was with much difficulty
that I could sit still and read a paper in the evening,
and it was a common occurrence to lie awake iu bed
until eleven, twelve, one, and two o'clock iu the
morning, and then I would sometimes get np and
stand on a stone doorstep, or go out into the snoio
barefooted and get chilled so that my nerves would
get quieted down so that I could sleep. My head
also troubled me very much.

But now, by the blessing of God and your verij
skilful treatment, I feel like a new 7nan. I can now
sit and read without suflering from nervousness,
and to use an old saying, "I can sleep like a pig."
I often say to my wife that I never enjoyed sleep
so well iu all my life as at the present time. And
in every respect I can truthfully say that I am a
hundred per cent better than I was a year ago, and
a more healthy man than I was fifteen years ago.

I would most earnestlj* recommend you to all suf-
fering from nervous disease as a true gentleman and
a skilful physician.

Most respectfully subscribed,

A. W. Parkhurst.

Commonwealth of Massachusetts, 1
Middlesex, ss. /

Chelmsford, April 7, 1873.
Personally appeared A. W. Parkhurst and made
oath to the within statement.

Before me,

Jonas J. Hoyt,

Justice of the Peace.



OPINIONS OF TBE PBESS,

" The Science op Life ; or, Self-Preservation," Df»
Hayes's new book, which is advertised iu our specla'
column, is a valuable work for old and young, as it fur*
Dishes important information in a much-neglected
department. See notice. — Watenille {Me.) Mail,
Aug. 21, 18P.S.

The Medical Work advertised in another column, by
Dr. Hayes, and entitled "The Science of Life; or,
Self-Preservation," has been received by us. It is a
neat little volume of undoubted value. Its possession
will amply repay the outlay necessary to obtain it.
It is the authoritative opinion of a qualified practi-
tioner, and as such will have a wide influence. Send
for a copy. — Ccos Republican, Aug. 25, 1868.

"The Science of Life; or, Self-Prcservation.*'
A Medical Treatise on Nervous and Physical Debility,
Spennatorrhosa, Impotence and Sterility, with practi-
cal observations on the treatment of diseases, etc.,
etc. With Illustrations. By Albert H. Hayes, M. D.,
No. 4 BuJflnch Street, Boston.

This work contains valuable Information in rcfer-
euce to the physical organization of m&n, and convoya
(3)



to the mind of inquirers information tliat will enabi*
them to avoid the terrible dangers to which the unwary
are exposed. It should be read by young men. — Calais
\Me.) Advertiser, Aug. 25, 1868.

" Science of Life ; or, Self-Preservation." A me-
dical treatise by Albert H. Ilayes, M. D., of Boston,
Published by the author.

Dr. Hayes has had a very extensive experience as
a medical practitioner and lecturer, and in this treatise
he has condensed the results of his observations. The
book is neatly printed and contains several plates.—
Fall River News, Aug. 22, 1808.

"The Science of Life." Dr. Albert n. Hayes,
of Boston, has published a volume of 280 pages with
the above title, which is a medical treatise on nervous
aud physical debility, with practical observations on
treatment of diseases of the generative organs. It is
highly spolccn of by the faculty. The Medical and
Surcjical Journal, than which there can be no higher
authority, says: " This is a truly scientific and popular
treatise by one of the most learned and popular physi-
cians of the day. If the young and middle-aged would
avoid mental depression, all nervous diseases, prema-
ture decay and death, let them read Dr. Hayes's
popular medical work entitled "The Science of Life.—
New Bedford Standard, Aug. 22, 1868.

"The Science op Human Life; or, Self-Preser-
vation." A Medical Treatise on Nervous and Physical
Debility, Spermatorrhoea, Impotence, Sterility, etc
By Albert H. Hayes, M. D.

The author of this little work has devoted many
years to the study and successful treatment of the dis-
eases to which the procreative organs of the human
family are liable ; and, as he states in the preface, has
acquired so thorough a knowledge of their nature
aud the certain method of their cure, that he deems
it a solemn duty to place before the public so muchot
that knowledge ;is can be conveyed through the ])riiited
pages of a comprehensive treatise on this important
Bubject, that the great multitude who are setting out



on the voyage of life may avoid the rocks and quick-
sands which have proved the ruin of so many of our
race. See advertisement. — Berkshire County Eagle,
Aug. 27, 1868.

"The Sciknce of Life: or, Self-Prcservation." '
A Jledical Treatise on Nervous and Physical De-
bility, S|iermatorrhcea, Impotence and Sterility,
with pr;vi;tical observations on the treatment of
Diseases of the Generative Organs, with Illustia-
tions. By Albert II. Hayes, M. D., Doctor of Med-
icine, Honorary Member of the American Medical
Society, Vice-President of Columbia College of
Physicians and Surgeons in Washington, D.C., etc.
Published by the Author : Boston.

The character aud object of this book is quite
fully indicated by the title. Dr. Hayes has a high
reputation, and the information which he gives in
this little volume Ave presume -may be regarded as
reliable ns any physician may give. It is human to
relieve those who arc paying the penalty of vicious
courses, but far more to induce the young of both
eexes to keep to the path of virtue, health aud hap-
piness. It seems to be the object of Dr. Hayes to
accomplish both these objects ; and in so far as
such is his purpose, and he is successful in it, he
will have the thanks of every friend of his race. —
Portland {Me.) Argus, Aug. 22, 1868,



[Certificate of Mrs. John Sawtell.]

No. 6 High Rock Court, )
Lynn, Mass., Sept., 18C9. J

To Nervous Sufferers throur/hout the loorld: I am
not fond of nor partial to publicity, and could not
be induced to thus publicly proclaim my own case
by any other motive than a sincere desire for the
(■ood of those «if my fellow-creatures who are suf-
fering the untold and indescribable miseries of
nervous disease.



5



For twenty years I was a victim of a terribly-
disordered condition of the nervous system, pro-
ducing what is called hypochondria, in which state
I was a subject of constant fear, anxiety, and
gloom. In spite of all efforts of the will, I was a
prey to imaginary ills and constant forebodings of
evil, which rendered life itself a burden. The senses
became perverted, and nothing seemed to give mo
pleasure, in consequence of the derangement and
del)iUty of my nervous system.

Fortunately I was led to make application to Dr.
Albert H. Hayes, of Boston, who immediately inter-
ested himself in my case ; and his treatment of it
has resulted in raising me up from a condition of
despair, and restoring my system to a healthy tone,
and dispelling permanently all the miseries that so
long afflicted me. I feel impelled by a sense of
gratitude to acknowledge the incalculable benellts
I have received from Dr. Hayes's treatment, and to
recommend all who are suffering from nervous dis-
eases, and desire a radical and permanent cure, to
apply to him without delay.

Mits. JOHN SAWTELL.

Miss Sahah E. Sa^tteli,, ( w.,n„..p,
Btephen H. Bawtell, ( WuneBsei.

Mrs. Sawtell is ready at any time to answer all
inqairiea.



East Woodstock, Conn., )
March 8th, 1873. )

To whom it may concern: In the year 1871, my
nervous system and physical powers became so
reduced by an unnatural drain, and my mind so dis-
eased, that my people deemed it necessary, for my
protection as well as their own, to send me to the
insane Asylum at Worcester. I was admitted to
the asylum Sept. 12th, 1871, and during tlie many
weelcs 1 was confined there, I grew worse, day by



day, until It seemed as though I should become a
raving maniac, unless I could get relief, which I
was sure I could never obtain in that Institution.

The last of November I managed to escape, and
by some mysterious providence I was led to the
Pcabody Medical Institute, Boston. Dr. Hayes, ti.e
chief consulting physician, and his assistant. Dr.
Paiker, immediately interested themselves in my
case; and after a most thorough and rigid exami-
nation, they pronounced my case curable. This 1
could not realize or believe, my mind being so
much diseased; but my father was subsequently
convinced of Dr. Hayes's great skill iu such cases
as mine, and also of the honorable business prin-
ciples that governed the management of the Pea-
body Medical Institute in every particular. He,
therefore, at once placed me under the treatment of
Dr. Hayes and his assistant. The proper remedies
were funii!.hed me, and I returned home with my
father, where I have remained in safety ever since,
visiting the doctor occasionally. The results have
been au astonishing change in my condition for the
better. I have now been taking Dr. Hayes's reme-
dies for a little more than a year, and consider the
good results but little less than miraculous. I do
not take medicine now, nor do I need any. When
I was forced, «r rather entrapped. Into the insane
asylum, the doctors there pronounced me incurable,
— and I think I was incurable at their hands.

If this testimonial, which I feel is my duty to
give, should fall under the notice of any suflerer
from nervous disease in any shape or form, or from
the diseases described in Dr. Hayes's " Science of
Life" ; or should this be seen by the friends of such
a suQ'erer, I would conscientiously and earnestly
recommend them to the author of this book, Dr.
Hayes, as a skilful physician and an honorable gen-
tleman. Nor can I do less; and should any poor,
Bufl'ering fellow-being wish to make further inquiry,

T



I win with delight give them all the hi formation in
my power. Euwaujj L. MoiiSK.

Suffolk, ss. March 8, 1873.

Subscribed anil sworn to l)cfore me,

Josiopii Bennett,

J'ustice of the Peace.




liDWARD L. MOUSE



IMPORTANT ANNOUNCEMENT.

•The author of The Science of Lif?, The Physiol-
ogy of Women, etc., has in press a new medical
w ork on the great curse of current life and civilizar
lion, to wit : Nervousness. This work is entitled,
Discaces of the Nervous System; or, Pathology
of the Nerves and Nervous Maladies. A Treatise
of Psychological Medicine, by Dr. A. H. Hayes, etc.

Ctmst thou not minister to a mind dlscos'd;
Pluck from the raemory a rooted sorrow;
Haze out the written troubles of the brain;
And with some sweet oblivious antidote
Cleanse the stufTd booom of chat perilous stuff,
That weighs upon the heart?

— Shakespeare.

There is absolutely no popular work on the
nerves and their diseases and derangements, a sub-
ject which we unhesitatingly pronounce to bo, at
this fast and crowded epoch, the most important in
tlie wkole range of medical pathology. Of late
years the science of mind has been studied in con-
nection with physiology. For mind and body are
iueh intimate companions that they sympatliiae, so
(11) .



«



to speak, with each others joys and sorrows per-
fectly. If one is sound and buoyant, the otlier it
In the same condition, and vice versa. If the nerves,
wliich are the organs of the mind, are healthy and
rigorous, the mind is bright and hopeful. On the
contrary, if they are jaded, diseased, and unstrung,
the mind is in tlie same state. The autlior of the
new work on nervous maladies has ransacked the
whole records of psychological medicine for inter-
esting and pertinent matter to combine with and
illustrate his own large experience in the specialty
of the treatment of nervous disease in all its thou-
randfold and most perplexing forms and manifesta-
tions, so that the general reader will find the new
work most interesting as well as instructive. Un-
der the dread name of nervous disease, what an
awful category of human ills is included ; such as
Insanity, Suicide, Narcotism, Alcoholism, Melan-
choly, Hysteria, Epilepsy, Ecstasy, Paralysis, Soft-
ening of the Brain, Soul-crushing Mental Anxiety,
etc., etc. I

All these subjects are fully and properly discussed
in tlie new work. Here is the table of contents :

Chapter 1, The Nerves and Brain. Chapter 2,
Nervous Disorders and the Temperaments. Chap-
ter 3, A Chief Cause of Nervous Derangements.
Cliapter 4, Patients with a Nervous Temperament.
Cliapter 5, Convivial Habits as a Cause of Nervous-
ness. Chapter 6, Anxiety of Mind. Chapter 7,
Kcligious Mania and Melancholy. Chapter 8, lUu-
lions and Hallucinations. Chapter 9, Sleep and
(12)



Sleeplessness. Chapter 10, Epilepsy. Chapter 11,
The Suicidal Propensity. Chapter 12, Treatment
jf the Insane. Chapter 13, Urinary Analysis as a
Detective of Disease. Chapter 14, Urinary Depos-
its. Chapter 16, Pathology of the Nerves and
Nervous Maladies. Cliapter 16, A Few Hygienic
Observations on Nervous Diseases. Chapter 17, A
Curious Case of Supposed Demoniacal Possession.
Cliapter 18, Hope and Confidence as Therapeutic
Agents. Chapter 19, Alcohol, Tobacco, Opium,
Hashish. Chapter 20, Body vs. Mind. Chapter
21, General Paralysis. Chapter 22, Dipsomania or
Drunken Insanity. Chapter 23, Late Suppers and
Dreams.



PEABODY MEDICAL INSTITUTE,

4 Bulflnch Street, Boston. -

fc^* The trade supplied by the NEW ENGLAND
NEWS COMPANY, No. 41 Court Street, Boston,
Mais.



A COSTLY MEDAL.



Coins and medals of gold are the oldest monuments
of history. They defy the corroding tooth of time, aud
preserve their beauty and value for thousands of years,
thus confirming the wisdom of those who originally
fixod upon gold as the best material for money. Tliere
is coinage of Miletus still in existence, which was minted
nine hundred years before our era. The empire of Alex-
ander the Great has faded almost into a myth, yet we
are told that the gold coins of Alexander, famous for
their beauty in the ancient world, are even at the present
day abundant, and that there are more specimens in
existence at the present day in the cabinets of collectors
or of travellers, who have packed them up, than could
be found of any American gold piece of the last century.
The California of the ancient Greeks and Persians was a
country, in what is now called Asia Miu6r, called Lydia.
Its mountain ranges were auriferous; Croesus, whose
name is the synonym of wealth was one of its kings. In
Lydia, money was first coined. Let us suppose that
Alexander the Great had been an inflationist and a be-
liever in greenback currency : the modern world would
not have had a correct idea of his physiognomy, which
has come down to us ou his golden coins with its linea-
ments as clear-cut as ever. But we are not going to
write a treatise on numismatics, or that branch of it
which concerns coins. Our business is with medals,
which are defined to be pieces of metal, struck with one



A Costly Medal.



or more dies, intended to commemorate some event oi
personage, and not designed for circulation. Among
tlie curiosities brought to light during the centennial
period was a Revolutionary medal, struck commemora-
tive of the evacuation of Boston by the British and iu
honor of Gen. Wasliington. This was a souvenir of that
most stirring epoch which will last longer than the
printed page of the historian, and bring future genera-
tions for all time face to face, as it were, with one of the
initial events heralding our American nationality. In
fact, no device has ever been hit upon as a reward of
merit or to commemorate a memorable incident, more
admirable, enduring, and appropriate than a richly-
wrought medal of gold. In fact, the issue of medals
seems to have been a very early custom. Many of the
largest pieces of ancient coins are more properly to be
regarded as medals struck for prizes in the games or in
commemoration of great events. In this country few
medals were struck until a comparatively late period.

The iJevolutionary medals presented to officers of tbo
army and navy by Congress are the first of the series.
The beautiful Franklin medal bestowed on meritorious
Bcbolars of the public schools of this city is too well
known to need more than a mere mention.

Medals are struck in gold, silver, copper, and white
metal. Bronze medals are copper medals bronzed. The
issue of medals from the mint has been chiefly confined
to the occasional striking of one to be presented to
Indian chiefs, or presentation medals ordered by Con-
gress. Agricultural Societies and others offer medals
as prizes, and of these there is a large and increasing
variety. It is a regular business now in Europe aud the
East to counterfeit ancient coins and medals to deluilo



A Costly Medal.



travellers anxious for authentic specimens of antiquity.
In fact, almost every traveller to Greece, Asia Minor,
etc., comes home with his pockets jingling with what
purports to be genuine specimens of the famous ancient
Athenian coinage. But all this is simply introductory to
our maiu purpose, which is to describe perhaps the most
elegant and costly medal which was ever struck on this
side of the Atlantic, — a medal which in the richness of
its material and the beauty of its design was most ad-
mirably fitted to be the visible and permanent token of
regard of a learned association for one of its most meri-
torious aud deserving members.

Reference is here made to the medal recently pre-
■ented to Dr. A. H. Hayes of this city by the National
Medical Association. The presentation was noticed at
the time of its occurrence, not only by the Boston press,
but by leading journals throughout the country. This
magnificent medal is of solid gold, set with diamonds on
the reverse side. Itis three inches andahalf in diameter;
its weight is eight ounces. The obverse side of the
medal bears the family crest of the recipient, a lion
rampant holding a pennant. Beneath the crest, in a
ribbon-like relief, is inscribed a Greek legend, which^
translated intact, signifies, " To the physician victorious
in his profession." Following this is the main inscrip-
tion : " From the National Medical Association to Albert
H. H.iyes, M. D., for distinguished skill and success,
and the discovery of new remedial agencies in the treat*
uieut of nervous affections.

"Commemorates no bloody field
This golden tropliy fair;
For pain assuaged, diseases healed,
'Tis given to genius rare."



A Cottly Medal.



On the reverse side of the medal is a medallion por«
trait of Dr. Hayes surmounted by a laurel wreath of
pure India diamouds. The exergue of the medal is cir-
cumscribed by forty diamonds of rare brilliancy. Around
tlio field is also the inscription, " Peabody Medical In-
stitution, " and underneath the medallion is the name
of the recipient. Altogether, in its execution and the
richness of its materials and size, this is decidedly the
most noticeable medal erer struck in this country for
any purpose whatever. It ia well worth the inspectioa
of numismatista.



To PattenL<t and Invalid Readen.



TO PATIENIS AND INVALID EEADERS^

Dr. Hayes havinjt for many years exclusively' de
voted his attention tn the treatment of the dis6as(<i
of the

Generative and Nervous System.

described in the preced^nf pages, may be personally
consulted from nine in the Morning until six : in tile
evening, daily, at his office and -esfdence, No. 4 Bulhuch
Street, Boston, (opposite Revere House.)

Dr. Hayes has made arrangements whereby packages
can be forwarded with secrecy and d'spatch to all parts
of the United States and British Prcvii^ccs.

For those who prefer coiTespondence, or who ar«
compelled to adopt that course, a minute .detail of their
bodily and mental grievances, written in a rimple style,
and in accordance with the unerring dictAter of theu
own feelings, wUl convey to the Doctor a fair idea o
his patient's case, and of course of all that is nocessaiy
for its safe treatment, and this the more naturallj from
the similarity that exists between multitudes of cases,
with which, from long observation and practice, he ha*'
already Ijecomo fiiuiiliar. One personal interview, ever)
with patients resident at a distance, is Jdr/hlij desirable
where practicable. The advantages to the patient are
manifold, when compared Tith mere correspondence. A




To Patients and Invalid Headers.



single visit will in most cases enable Dr. H. to form an
instantaneous and accurate jiulgmGut, and thus facilitate
the patient's recovery. la the first place, many impor-
tant questions atl'ecting the patient are likely to be sug-
gested by a personal interview, which would, in all
probabOity, be lost sight of in correspondence. Sec-
ondly, a more correct diagnosis of the disordei-, and a
Iwtler appreciation of the patient's constitution, can be
arrived at, whilst a microscopic examination of the
urine, where necessary, will render any mistake im-
possible, especially in cases of Spermatorrhoea. And,
thirdly, where the patient is laboring under urethral
discha ges, which may or may not be produced by
impure connection, one personal visit, with a view to
an urmary examination, is eminently advantageous.
In a word, the correspondent will be more than repaid
foi the trouble and expense of his journey to Boston,
by the increased certainty and rapidity of the cure.

COUNTKY PATIENTS

Are informed that by forwarding their letters through
the Post, they can have tlie necessary remedies sent to
» any address, or can be directed to be left at a Eailway
Station or Coach Office till called for, in a portable
compass, carefully packed and fiee from observation ;
and they may be taken vrithout confinement or any
restraint. It is well that patients should consult their
T.T/n interest, by being as minute as possible in the
detail of their symptoms, age, general habits of living,
occupation in life, and position in society. The com-
munication must be accompanied by the usual consult-



To Patients and Invalid Headers.



ation fee of Five Dollars, or a post-offlce order foi
that amount (payable to Dr. A. H. Hayes, Boston,)
without which no notice can be taken of their ap-
plication, and a distinct name must be given willi
each post-olQce order, or there may be difficulty in
getting it paid. In all cases, secrecy is to be consid-
ered as inviolable, as all letters are either returned
to the writers or destroyed at the termination of
each case. Where bank notes are enclosed in let-
ters, it will insure their safety by registering the
letter at any post-offlce, which can be done at a
trifling expense, and is frequeutlj' preferable to ob-
taining a post-offlce order, as it is unnecessary to
give any name or address in registering the letter.

For years past much of the author's practice has
been carried ou by corkespondenck only.

Dr. Hayes's office, though centrally located and
easy to find, is free from observation (no idlers
hanging around the doorway, so common to other
localities), and patients, whether ladies or gentle-
men, will see no one but the Doctor himself, as his
numerous parlors are especially adapted to this
purpose.

No. 4 BULFINCH STREET, BOSTON.

Office hours from 9 o'clock A. M., to 6 o'clock,
P. M.

Kind and skilful nurses, with good board
and pleasant rooms, for those who wish to remain
lu the city for a time, under the Doctor's treat
mont.



V




I
