1




WORKS

, ON

MEDICINE AND SCIENCE

PUBLISHED BY

MWE (DMTOCHHLLo



DR. GOLDING BIRD, F.L.S.

THE DIAGNOSIS, PATHOLOGICAL INDICATIONS

AND TREATMENT OF URINARY DEPOSITS. With Thirty-
one Engravings on Wood. Post 8vo. cloth, 8s.

BY THE SAME AUTHOR.

ELEMENTS OF NATUEAL PHILOSOPHY ; being an

Experimental Introduction to the Study of the Physical Sciences.
Illustrated with Three Hundred Wood-cuts. Second Edition. Fcap.
8vo. cloth, 12s. Gd.

" We have great pleasure in welcoming a new edition of this excellent work,
which we strongly recommended to our readers on its first appearance. We do
not hesitate to pronounce it the best Manual of Natural Philosophy in our lan-
guage. " — British and Foreign Medical Review.



DR. BUDD, F.R.S.

ON DISEASES OF THE LIVEE ; illustrated with

Coloured Plates and Engravings on Wood. 8vo. cloth, 1 4s.

" We cannot too strongly recommend the diligent study of this volume. The
work cannot fail to rank the name of its author among the most enlightened
pathologists and soundest practitioners of the day." — Medico-Chirurgicul Review.



DR. CARPENTER, F.R.S.

PEINCIPLES OF HUMAN PHYSIOLOGY; with their

chief applications to Pathology, Therapeutics, Hygiene, and Forensic
Medicine. Witli numerous Illustrations on Steel and Wood. Second
Edition. 8vo. cloth, 20s.

" We have much satisfaction in declaring our opinion that this work is the best
systematic treatise on Physiology in our own language, and the best adapted for the
student existing in any language."— Medico-Chirurgicul Review.

BY THE SAME AUTHOR.

PEINCIPLES OF GENEEAL AND COMPAEATIYE

PHYSIOLOGY ; intended as an Introduction to the Study of
Human Physiology, and as a Guide to the Philosophical Pursuit of
Natural History. Illustrated with numerous Figures on Copper and
Wood. The Second Edition. 8vo. cloth, 18s.

" I , r . CCOInnlend t0 y° ur perusal a work recently published by Dr. Carpenter It
has this advantage, it is very much up to the present state of knowledge on the
subject. It is written in a clear style, and is well illustrated."— Professor Sharoct/'s
Introductory Lecture. 1 ■'



3



M3R. CMraCIEI]Il.lL , 3 1PTOMCATI©IJ3.



SIR ASTLEY COOPER, BART., F.R.S.

A TREATISE ON DISLOCATIONS AND FEAC-

TURES OF THE JOINTS. Edited by BRANSBY B. COOPER,
F.R.S. 8vo. cloth, 20s.

Sir Astley Cooper left very considerable additions in MS. for the ex-
press purpose of being introduced into this Edition.

" The present will be found a much more convenient edition of this invaluable
work than its predecessors. Although new matter and new illustrations have
been added, the price has been reduced from two guineas to twenty shilliugs.
After the fiat of the profession, it would be absurd in us to eulogize Sir Astley
Cooper's work on Fractures and Dislocations. It is a national one, and will pro-
bably subsist as long as English surgery." — Medico-Chirurgical Review.

BY THE SAME AUTHOR.

OBSERVATIONS ON THE STRUCTURE AND

DISEASES OF THE TESTIS. Illustrated with Twenty-four
highly finished coloured Plates. Second Edition. Royal 4to. cloth.

Reduced from 31. 3s. to 11. 10s.



MR. FERGUSSON, F.R.S.E.

A SYSTEM 0E PRACTICAL SURGERY; with Two

Hundred and Forty-six Illustrations. Fcap. 8vo. cloth, 1 2s. 6d.

" Professor Fergusson's work, we feel persuaded, will be as great a favourite as
it deserves, for it combines the powerful recommendations of cheapness and ele-
gance with a clear, sound, ami practical treatment of every subject in surgical
science. The illustrations, by Bagg, are admirable — in his very best style." —
Edinburgh Journal of Medical Science.



MR. FOWNES, PH. D., F.R.S.

A MANUAL 0E CHEMISTRY; with numerous Ilks-
trations on Wood. Fcnp. 8vo. cloth, 12s. 6d.

"An admirable exposition of the present state of chemical science, simply and
clearly written, and displaying a thorough practical knowledge of its details, as
well as a profound acquaintance with its principles. The illustrations, and the
whole KCtting-up of the book, merit our highest praise." — British mid Foreign
Medical Jleview.

BY THE SAME AUTHOR.

THE ACTONIAN PRIZE ESSAY OF 100 GUINEAS,

AWARDED BY THE COMMITTEE OP THE ROYAL INSTITUTION OP
GREAT BRITAIN.

CHEMISTRY; AS EXEMH2FMG THE WISDOM AND

BENEFICENCE OF COD. Post 8yo. cloth, 6s.



MM. cmracMiix's pubuoatiohs.



3



"WITH A PHEEACE BY PE.OEESSOK 1IEEIG.
C. REMIGIUS FRESENIUS.

ELEMENTAEY INSTRUCTION IN CHEMICAL

ANALYSIS, as practised in the LABORATORY of GIESSIN.
Edited by LLOYD BULLOCK, late Student at Giessen. Demy
8vo. cloth, 9s.



G. J. GUTHRIE, F.R.S.

THE ANATOMY OF THE BLADDER AND OE THE

URETHRA, and the Treatment of the Obstructions to which these
Passages are liable. Third Edition. 8vo. cloth, 5s.

BY THE SAME AUTHOR.

ON INJURIES OE THE HEAD AFFECTING THE

BRAIN. 4to. boards, 6s.

"The great practical importance of those affections which constitute Mr.Guthric's
Treatise. A commentary on such a theme, written by a surgeon of experience and
reputation, cannot fail to attract the attention of the profession."— British and
Foreign Medical Review.

DR. GUY.

HOOPEE'S PHYSICIAN'S VADE-MECUM; OR,

MANUAL OF THE PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE OF
PHYSIC. New Edition, considerably enlarged, and re- written.
Fcap. 8vo. cloth.

DR. MARSHALL HALL, F.R.S.

PEACTICAL OBSEEVATIONS AND SUGGESTIONS

IN MEDICINE. Post 8vo. cloth, 8s. 6d.



MR. HOOD.

ON THE DISEASES MOST FATAL TO CHILDEEN,

with Reference to the Propriety of Treating them as proceeding from
Irritation, and not from Inflammation. Post 8vo. cloth, 6s.

" The views of Mr. Hood arc, to a greater extent than is usually imagined, borne
out hy all the best late writers who have seen much practice among children. The
work is purely a practical one, and is a valuable contribution to our knowledge."
— Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal.



DR. HOPE, F.R.S.

A TEEATISE ON THE DISEASES OF THE HEAET

AND GREAT VESSELS, and on the Affections which may be
mistaken for them. With Plates. Third Edition. 8vo. cloth, 1 lis.



4



MEo CEiUECHIILL'S PTOUCATOOIJS.



DR. HENNEN, F.R.S.

PEINCIPLES OF MILITAET SUEGEEY; comprising

Observations on the Arrangement, Police, and Practice of Hospital?;
and on the History, Treatment, and Anomalies of Variola and Syphilis!
Illustrated with Cases and Dissections. Third Edition, with Life of
the Author, by his Son, Dr. JOHN HENNEN. 8vo. boards, 16s



MR. LAWRENCE, F.R.S.

A TEEATISE ON EUPTUEES. The Fifth Edition,

considerably enlarged. 8vo. cloth, 16s.

"The peculiar advantage of the treatise of Mr. Lawrence is, that he explains
his news on the anatomy of hernia and the different varieties of the disease in a
manner which renders his book peculiarly useful to the student. It must be
superfluous to express our opinion of its value to the surgical practitioner. As
a treatise on hernia, presenting a complete view of the literature of the subject
it stands in the first rank."— Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal. '



MR. LISTON, F.R.S.

PEACTTCAL OE OPEEATIYE SUEGEEY. The

Third Edition. 8vo. cloth, 22s.

Extract from Preface.
"A third edition having been called for, the letter-press has been revised and
corrected with care ; extensive additions have been made, and a great many new
wood-engravings added. These improvements, it is hoped, may render the work
more useful to surgical pupils, and better entitled to the patronage of the profession
at large."



DR. HUNTER LANE, F.L.S., F.S.S.A.

A COMPENDIUM OF MATEEIA MEDICA AND

PHARMACY ; adapted to the London Pharmacopoeia, embodying all
the New French, American, and Indian Medicines; and also com-
prising a Summary of Practical Toxicology. One neat pocket volume,
cloth, 5s.

" Dr. Lane's volume is on the same general plan as Dr. Thompson's long known
Conspectus ; but it is much fuller in its details, more especially in the chemical
department. It seems carefully compiled, is well suited for its purpose, and
cannot fail to be useful." — British and Foreign Medical Reviejv.



DR. LEE, F.R.S.

CLINICAL MIDWLFEEY; with the Histories of Four
Hundred Cases of Difficult Labour. Fcap. 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d.

" The following Reports comprise the most important practical details of all the
cases of difficult parturition which have come under my observation during the
last fifteen years, and of which I have preserved written histories. They have
now been collected and arranged for publication, in the hope that they may be
found to illustrate, confirm, or correct the rules laid down by systematic writers,
for the treatment of difficult labours, and supply that course of clinical instruction
in midwifery, the want of which has been so often experienced by practitioners at
the commencement of their career." — From Preface.



MM. CIOTIRCIEIIILIL'S ETOMCATraNS. 5



MR. LANGSTON PARKER.

THE MODEEN TEEATMENT OF SYPHILITIC

DISEASES, both Primary and Secondary; comprehending the Im-
proved Methods of Practice adopted in this Country and on the
Continent, with numerous Formulae for the Preparation and Admi-
nistration of the new Remedies ; to which is added an Account of a
Safe and Successful Mode of Treating Chronic, Constitutional, and
Protracted Syphilis, by the Mercurial Vapour Bath. Second Edition,
considerably enlarged.



DR. MILLINGEN.

ON THE TEEATMENT AND MANAGEMENT OF

THE INSANE : with Considerations on Public and Private Lunatic
Asylums. 1 8mo. cloth, 4s. 6d.

"Dr. Millingen, in one small pocket volume, has compressed more real solid
matter than could he gleaned out of any dozen of octavos, on the same subject.
We recommend this vade-mecum as the best thing of the kind we ever perused."
— Dr. Johnson's Review.



DR. PROUT, F.R.S.

ON THE NATUEE AND TEEATMENT OF STO-

MACH AND RENAL DISEASES; being an Inquiry into the
Connexion of Diabetes, Calculus, and other Affections of the Kidney
and Bladder with Indigestion. Fourth Edition. With Six Engravings.
8vo. cloth, 20s.

BY THE SAME AUTHOR.

CHEMISTEY, METE0E0L0GY, AND THE FUNC-
TION OF DIGESTION, considered with reference to NATURAL
THEOLOGY. Being a Third Edition, with much new matter, of
the " Bridgewater Treatise." 8vo. cloth, 15s.



DR. RAMS BOTH AM.

THE PEINCIPLES AND PEACTICE OF 0BSTE-

TRIC MEDICINE AND SURGERY, IN REFERENCE TO
THE PROCESS OF PARTURITION. Illustrated with One
Hundred and Ten Plates on Steel and Wood; forming one thick
handsome volume. Second Edition. 8vo. cloth, 22s.

" The work of Dr. Kamsbotham may be described as a complete system of the
principles and practice of midwifery ; and the author has been at very great pains
indeed to present a just and useful view of the present state of obstetrical
knowledge. The illustrations are numerous, well selected, and appropriate and
engraved with great accuracy and ability. In short, we regard this work' be-
tween accurate descriptions and usefid illustrations, as by far the most able work
on the principles and practice of midwifery, that has appeared for a long time
Dr. Kamsbotham has contrived to infuse a larger proportion of common sense
and plain unpretending practical knowledge into his work, than is commonly
Sound in works on this subject ; and as such wc have great pleasure in recom-
mending it to the attention of obstetrical practitioners."— Edinburgh Medical
and Surgical Journal. 6



0 MEL OTIJEOTn.lL'S PUBOCATICiHS.



DR. RANKING.

EESEAECHES AND OBSEEVATIONS ON SCEOFU-

LOUS DISEASES. By J. G. LUGOL. Translated, with an Ap-
pendix. 8vo. cloth, 10s. 6d.

DR. RYAN.

THE UNTVEESAL PHARMACOPOEIA; OB, A PEAC-

TICAL FORMULAKY of HOSPITALS, both BRITISH and
FOREIGN. Third Edition, considerably enlarged. 32mo. cloth,
5s. Gd.

"This work is a conspectus of the best prescriptions of the most celebrated
physicians and surgeons throughout the civilized world. It gives the doses and
uses, the rules for prescribing, the actions of medicines on the economy, the vari-
ous modes of administering them, and the principles on which they are com-
pounded."

MR. SNELL, M.R.C.S.

A PEACTICAL GUIDE TO 0PEEATX0NS ON THE

TEETH. With Plates. 8vo. cloth, 8s.

" Those of our readers who practise in the department of surgery on which
Mr. Snell's essay treats will find some useful instructions on the mode of ex-
tracting teeth," &c. &c. — Medical Gazette.

DR. STEGGALL.

FOR MEDICAL AND SURGICAL EXAMINATION.

I.

A MANUAL FOB THE USE 0E STUDENTS PREPARING

FOR EXAMINATION AT APOTHECARIES' HALL. Ninth
Edition. 12rno. cloth, 8s. fid.

ii.

A MANUAL EOB THE COLLEGE 0E SURGEONS ; 12mo.

cloth, 12s. 6d.

in.

GBE GOBY'S CONSPECTUS MEDICLNiE THEOBETICJE.

The First Part, containing the Original Text, with an Ordo Ver-
borum and Literal Translation. 12mo. cloth, 10s.

IV.

THE EIBST EOUB BOOKS OF CELSUS. Containing the

Text, CTrdo Verborum, and Translation. 12mo. cloth, 8s.
* * The above two works comprise the entire Latin Classics required for
Examination at Apothecaries' Hall.

v.

FIRST LINES FOB CHEMISTS AND DEUGGISTS PBEPAB-

ING FOR EXAMINATION AT THE PHARMACEUTICAL
SOCIETY. 18mo. cloth, 3s. (id



MEL CHraCHIIXS OTEUCATODUS.



-9R
1



MR. SHAW, M.R.C.S.

THE MEDICAL BEMEMBBANCEB ; OB, BOOK

OF EMERGENCIES : in which are concisely pointed out the Imme-
diate Remedies to he adopted in the First Moments of Danger from
Poisoning, Drowning, Apoplexy, Bums, and other Accidents; with the
Tests for the Principal Poisons, and other useful Information. Second
Edition. 32mo. cloth, 2s. 6cf.

" The plan of this little book is well conceived, and the execution corresponds
thereunto. It costs little money, and will occupy little room ; and we think no
practitioner will regret being the possessor of what cannot fail, sooner or later,
to be useful to him."— British and Foreign Medical Review.



J. STEPHENSON, M.D., & J. M. CHURCHILL, F.L.S.

MEDICAL BOTANY; OB, LLLUSTBATIONS AND

DESCRIPTIONS OF THE MEDICINAL PLANTS OF THE
PHARMACOPOEIAS; comprising a popular and scientific Account
of Poisonous Vegetables indigenous to Groat Britain. New Edition,
edited by GILBERT BURNETT, F.L.S., Professor of Botany in
King's College. In three handsome royal 8vo. volumes, illustrated by
Two Hundred Engravings, beautifully drawn and coloured from nature,
cloth lettered, Six Guineas.

" The most complete and comprehensive work on Medical Botany." — Pharma-
ceutical Journal.

ALFRED S. TAYLOR.

A MANUAL OF MEDICAL JUBISPEUDENCE.

Fcap. 8vo. cloth, 12s. 6d.

" We have the pleasure of meeting the accumulated stores of science and ex-
perience on this branch of knowledge, condensed and made accessible in this
admirable volume. It is, in fact, not only the fullest and most satisfactory book
wc have evev consulted on the subject, but it is also one of the most masterly
works we have ever perused." — -Medical Gazette.

" The most elaborate and complete work that has yet appeared. It contains an
immense quantity of cases, lately tried, which entitles it to be considered now
what Beck was in its day." — Dublin Medical Journal.

" Mr. Taylor possesses the happy art of expressing himself on a scientific topic
in intelligible language. The size of his Manual fits it to be a circuit companion.
It is one of the most beautiful specimens of typography we ever had the pleasure —
and it is a pleasure — of perusing." — Law Times.



BY A PRACTISING PHYSICIAN.

THE PBESCBLBEB'S PHABMACOPCEIA ; containing

all the Medicines in the London Pharmacopoeia, arranged in Classes
according to their Action, with their Composition and Doses. Third
Edition. 32mo. cloth, 2s. 6d.

" Never was half-a-crown better spent than in the purchase of this 'Thesaurus
Medicaminum.' This little work, with our visiting-book and stethoscope, are our
daily companions in tile carriage." — Dr. Johnson's Review.



0 ME. CHURCEIIILIL'S PBEILICATIIOHS.



DR. WILLIAMS, F.R.S.

PELNCIPLES OF MEDICINE ; comprehending General
Pathology and Therapeutics. Demy 8vo. cloth, 12s.

" The entire work is one of no ordinary ability, and well sustains the reputation
of the author." — Provincial Medical Journal.

" We have no hesitation in asserting, that the reader will derive greater plea-
sure, and more useful practical knowledge, from this book, than from any other
treatise on the subject, that we are acquainted with. Dr. Williams has already
earned for himself a lasting fame, by his work on Diseases of the Chest; and "that

must, if possible, be increased still more by his " Principles of Medicine."

Dublin Medical Journal.



BY THE SAME AUTHOR.

THE PATHOLOGY AND DIAGNOSIS OF DISEASES

OF THE CHEST; illustrated chiefly by a Rational Exposition of
their Physical Signs. Fourth Edition, with much important new
matter. Plates. 8vo. cloth, 10s. 6d.

" The fact that a fourth edition is called for is a very good argument in favour
of any book. But this was not necessary in the case of Dr. Williams ; it was
well known to the profession as one of the best manuals of diseases of the chest
we possess." — Dublin Medical Journal.



MR. ERASMUS WILSON, F.R.S.

DISEASES OF THE SKIN; a Practical and Theoretical
Treatise on the DIAGNOSIS, PATHOLOGY, and TREATMENT
of CUTANEOUS DISEASES, arranged according to a Natural
System of Classification, and preceded by an Outline of the Anatomy
and Physiology of the Skin. 8vo. cloth, 10s. 6d.

" We have now reached the conclusion of the volume, and our perusal has been
both agreeable and instructive. The book is not written for a day, but for an age,
the style is good and precise, the language well selected, and the information which
it contains, genuine and copious. We think it adapted to cast a new light on the
pathology and treatment of diseases on the skin, and to form an admirable guide
to the medical practitioner, to whom and to the student we warmly recommend it."
— Dr. Johnson's Review.



BY THE SAME AUTHOR.

THE ANATOMIST'S VADE-MECUM; A SYSTEM

OF HUMAN ANATOMY. With One Hundred and Sixty-eight

Illustrations on Wood. Third Edition. Fcap. 8vo. cloth, 12s. 6d.

" As a satisfactory proof that the praise we bestowed on the first edition of this
work was not unmerited, we may observe it has been equally well thought of in
foreign countries, having been reprinted in the United .States and in Germany.
In every respect, this work, as an anatomical guide for the student and the prac-
titioner, merits our wannest and most decided praise."— Sledical Gaeette.

" This is probably the prettiest medical book ever published, and we believe its
intrinsic merits arc in keeping with its exterior advantages, having examined it
sufficiently to satisfy us that it mav be recommended to the student as no less
distinguished by its accuracy and clearness of description than by its typographi-
cal elegance. The wood-cuts arc exquisite."— British and Foreign Medical Review.



London : Printed by VV. Blanchard anb Sons, Warwick Lane, St. Paul s.



MODERN TREATMENT

OF

SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



THE



MODERN TREATMENT



OF



SYPHILITIC DISEASES,



PRIMARY AND SECONDARY.



COMPRISING



NUMEROUS FORMULA FOR THE PREPARATION AND MODE
OF ADMINISTRATION OF THE NEW REMEDIES ;



AN ACCOUNT OF A SAFE AND SUCCESSFUL MODE OF TREATING CHRONIC,
PROTRACTED, AND CONSTITUTIONAL SYPHILIS
BY THE MERCURIAL VAPOUR-BATH.



BY LANGSTON PARKER,

SURGEON TO THE QUEEN'S HOSPITAL, BIRMINGHAM, ETC. ETC.



SECOND EDITION. ^) p£j{



LONDON:

JOHN CHURCHILL, PRINCES STREET, SOIIO

MDCCCXLV.



C AM) J. ADLARO, PK.1STEKS, UARTHOLOS1EW CLOSE.



PREFACE



TO THE SECOND EDITION.



Six years' additional experience, both in Hospital and
private practice, has enabled me to confirm the efficacy of
most of the plans of treatment recommended in the first
edition of this work. Much new matter has been added in
the present edition, chiefly, if not altogether, original. That
which I regard of the first importance, is the account of the
treatment of various forms of Syphilis by the Mercurial
Vapour-Bath. Diseases rebellious or tedious under ordinary
treatments, generally yield with ease to this combination ;
more particularly affections of the skin and bones ; the dura-
tion of treatment is by it much shortened, the quantity of
medicine required to be given by the mouth greatly diminished,
and the cures rendered more permanent and certain. Relapses
after this mode of treatment I have found extremely rare;
whereas under the ordinary plan they are exceedingly frequent,



V1 PREFACE.

even after a perfect cure had been supposed to have been
effected.

On the whole it is hoped that this edition, entirely re-
written, may be found more worthy the attention of the
reader than that which preceded it.



20, Colmore Row, Birmingham ;
Oct. 1845.



PREFACE



TO THE FIRST EDITION.



The modern researches on Syphilis, its complications and
consequences, and the improved modes of practice which have
been the result of such investigations in this country, and on
the continent, have, as yet, been made known to the public
only in detached portions, and that chiefly, if not altogether,
through the medium of the periodical medical literature of
the day.

Much attention to the subject has impressed me with a
conviction, that a work containing the result of modern
experience would not be unacceptable to the profession ;
whilst, to the junior part of it, such a publication might be
exceedingly useful.

Usefulness, and not originality, has been the great object I
have consulted in composing the present work. It contains
little, and, I believe, no theoretical matter, except perhaps
the account of Mons. Ricord's researches "On Inoculation,"
in reference to Syphilis. I originally intended, and to the
best of my ability I have carried out my intention, that it
should contain only the result of generally received modern
•experience on the treatment of syphilitic diseases. I have
adopted no party in the question ; as will be perceived by a
perusal of the work, not agreeing exclusively with the mer-



vm



PREFACE.



curialists, on the one hand, or condemning the remedy in
toto, on the other, in accordance with the principles of the
rational or physiologic school, or the partisans of the simple
treatment. I have endeavoured to hold out to the confidence
of the reader those plans of treatment, and those only, which
are calculated to cure his patient the most speedily and with
the greatest safety.

The opinions and practice of Wallace, Desruelles, Cullerier,
and more particularly Mons. Ricord, will he found fully de-
scribed in the following pages ; whilst, at the same time, the
result of my own experience has been added to the weight
of theirs. In addition to this the value of many new remedies,
now much employed in the treatment of Syphilis, has been
discussed, and numerous forms for their administration given.



I



CONTENTS.



Chap. I. page
On the simple or rational treatment of Syphilis without mercury . . 1

Chap. II.

On the mercurial treatment of Syphilitic diseases . . . .If

Chap. III.

On inoculation, as applied to the diagnosis and treatment of

Syphilitic diseases 19

Chap. IV.

Of the first class of primary Syphilitic diseases ; gonorrhoea, its
varieties, and consequences. Balanitis, inflammation of the
glans penis; external or false gonorrhoea ; chancrous excori-
ation, &c. . ... . . . , t . 27

Chap. V.

Of gonorrhoea , 33



Chap. VI.

Of diseases which succeed to gonorrhoea in the male ... 62



X



CONTENTS.



Chap. VII. page
Of gonorrhoea in the female 75

Chap. VIII.

Of the second class of primary Syphilitic diseases. Ulcers, their

varieties and consequences 83

Chap. IX.

Of chancres of the urethra 98

Chap. X.

Of phagedaena 109

Chap. XI.

Of venereal ulcers in the female 121

Chap. XII.

Of bubo 123

Chap. XIII.

Of constitutional or secondary Syphilis 140

Chap. XIV.

Of the Syphilida — Syphilitic diseases of the skin . . . . 145

Chap. XV.

Constitutional or secondary Syphihtic ulcerations of mucous mem-
branes 157

Chap. XVI.

Of Syphilitic diseases of the nostrils, and nasal fossae . . . 160



Chap. XVII.
Of Syphihtic ulceration of the larynx .



162



CONTENTS. x i

Chap. XVIII. page
Of Syphilitic warts j excrescences ; vegetations, and mucous tubercles 165

Chap. XIX.

Of the Syphilitic testicle 175

Chap. XX.

Of Syphilitic diseases of the periosteum and bones. Ostitis. Peri-
ostitis. Caries. Nocturnal pains 176

Chap. XXI.

Of the treatment of Syphilis in pregnant women, children, and

nurses 186

Chap. XXII.

Of the employment of particular remedies in the treatment of pri-
mary and constitutional Syphilis 195



Chap. XXIII.

General view of the treatment of Syphilis, with suggestions for the
prevention and cure of protracted and constitutional symptoms



213



Preparing for publication,

Wi THE SAME AUTHOR,

Cases illustrative of the Efficacy of Treatment by the MERCURIAL
VAPOUR-BATH, in various forms of constitutional Syphilis.



THE

MODERN TREATMENT

OF

SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



CHAPTER I.

THE SIMPLE TREATMENT OF SYPHILITIC DISEASES.

1. In 1813 Mr. Carmichael first drew the attention of the
profession in this country to the systematic treatment of ve-
nereal diseases without mercury, limiting the employment of
this medicine to certain forms of primary and constitutional
infection. Mr. Carmichael employs mercury "in alterative
doses" in cases of the " simple primary ulcer of the, papular
venereal disease which do not yield to rest, l!he' antiphlogistic
treatment, and astringent washes, and to produce its full ef-
fects in the true Hunterian chancre, with hardened edge and
base." In the constitutional forms of disease this surgeon
has recourse to mercury in alterative doses, " when the papular
and pustular eruptions become scaly, and obviously on the
decline, and have not yielded to sarsaparilla, antimonials, and
the hydriodate of potass," to produce its full effects in iritis,
in nodes when iodine has failed, and for the scaly eruption,
the lepra or psoriasis which attends it, and the deep excavated
ulcer of the tonsils.

2. It will be perceived that this practice is materially dif-

1



2



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



ferent from that employed on many parts of the continent,
in Paris, Hamburg, Vienna, Sweden, and other places, where
many surgeons treat venereal diseases, in all forms, without
the exhibition of any mercurial preparation.

3. Various plans of treating syphilis without mercury have
been practised by surgeons in all parts of the world prior to
the time of Broussais, although that treatment, which is de-
nominated at the present day "simple," dates its origin more
immediately from the doctrines of that pathologist. Broussais,
considering syphilis as a mere irritation without any specific
character, promulgated in 1815 the following opinions on its
nature and treatment :

4. "That syphilis is an irritation affecting the exterior of
the body. That it is at first a local disease, but becomes sub-
sequently constitutional ; that to prevent the latter, the local
disease must be treated by antiphlogistics, more particularly
by frequent and full local bloodletting.

5. "That confirmed or constitutional syphilis maybe cured
by abstinence and an antiphlogistic treatment ; but this method
being tedious, mercury and sudorifics are generally preferred.
That mercury and sudorifics cure syphilis by producing revul-
sion upon the exhalant capillaries :" hence, by Desruelles 1
and others, this is termed the " revulsive treatment."

6. "That the remedies termed antisyphilitic should be ad-
ministered internally with caution, otherwise they commonly
produce gastro-enteric affections, which exasperate the primi-
tive disease ; the revulsive action of the remedies is thus pre-
vented, irritation is set up in the viscera, which terminates
ultimately in their disorganization.

7. " When the remedies termed antisyphilitic have produced
gastro-enteric irritation or inflammation, and the syphilis is
not cured, the latter only amends with the affection of the
stomach and bowels, and a long perseverance in a strict anti-
phlogistic regimen. If the abdominal viscera are disorganized,
or the patient too much weakened, the cure is impossible.

1 Traite dcs Maladies veneriennes. Paris, 1836.



SIMPLE TREATMENT.



3



8. " Mercurial preparations applied topically to external
syphilitic irritations or sores, exasperate them always when
they are intense, irritable, or inflamed. They cure them
only when they are indolent, by opposing irritation to irrita-
tion. This fact is also applicable to all visceral inflamma-
tions, &c.

9. " Scrofulous subjects are more difficult to cure of syphilis
than others. Those predisposed to visceral irritations should,
when suffering from venereal affections, be treated on the anti-
phlogistic plan, both externally and internally. If treated in-
ternally by mercurials, the viscera are excited, and sometimes
the syphilis itself is not cured."

10. Such are the principles laid down by Broussais, for
although the non-mercurial treatment of syphilis had been
occasionally resorted to, it was left to Broussais to lay down
the simple treatment as a system. In the aphorisms of this
pathologist many opinions are promulgated in reference to
syphilis, which are contradicted by all ancient and modern
experience, and even by the most candid of the followers of
the physiologic school. We do not consider syphilis a mere
irritation, independent of any specific character, as the re-
searches of Ricord and others amongst the moderns sufficiently
prove. It is a specific disease, inasmuch as many of its forms
may be propagated by inoculation, and thus diseases of a pre-
cisely similar character produced. 1 It is a disease of irritation,
inasmuch as all venereal sores are accompanied by a greater
or less degree of inflammation ; the intensity of this inflam-
mation, and consequently the violence of the disease, depend-
ing on the constitution of the patient, the circumstances in
which he is placed, his habits of living, and the local treat-
ment of the syphflitic sore.

11. The simple or rational treatment is directed towards
the removal of all the local and constitutional irritation which
accompanies a venereal sore, by which the sore itself in many
instances beals, and the disease is cured. Where it becomes



Ricord, Traite pratique des Maladies ve'nenennes. Paris, 1838.



4



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



necessary to employ mercury, it will invariably be found ad-
vantageous to administer tbe remedy in accordance with the
principles of tbe simple treatment. This proposition is illus-
trated by the practice of the late Dr. Wallace of Dubbin, who
states that the most appalling forms of syphilis which he has
met with have resulted from the injudicious application of
mercurial preparations to venereal sores in a state of irritation
or inflammation.

12. In all venereal affections, whether primitive or second-
ary, the diet should be light and unstimulating, and directly
proportionate to the degree of irritation accompanying the
disease, to the age and idiosyncrasy of the patient. It is diffi-
cult (says M. Cullerier) to conceive why the regulation of
diet, so important in all other diseases, whether acute or
chronic, should have been totally neglected in the management
of syphilis. The patient should be placed upon the lowest
possible diet when the local venereal affection is accompanied
by much inflammation or irritability, when the affections are nu-
merous in the same individual, if the disease be constitutional,
the principal viscera in a state of excitement or irritabnity,
and the subject young and vigorous. This regimen should be
still more closely adhered to if the affection occur in spring or
autumn, and is yet more strongly indicated if the patient be
subjected to a mercurial course. 1 Desruelles recommends a
milk diet if the patient be weak and the viscera unsound. 2

1 See Desruelles on this subject, op. cit. p. 249.

2 In Sweden and Denmark, venereal diseases are treated systematically
by diet alone, and to this plan the name "cura famis" has been given. It
consists in submitting the patient to a very severe regimen, and the admi-
nistration of the extracts of bark and conium as medicines. The regimen
of the patient during tbe first six weeks consists of five ounces of roast
meat without gravy or condiment of any kind, and six ounces of wbite
bread soaked in water; this quantity is divided into two or three portions,
but it is the whole quantity allowed for one day's consumption. The
extract of conium is given in doses of four or six grains night and morn-
ing. At the end of six weeks the patient resumes his ordinary diet. All
kinds of venereal diseases may be treated on this plan, whether recent or



SIMPLE TREATMENT.



5



13. On this point no fixed rules can be laid down; 1 they
must be dictated by the circumstances of the case, and call for
the exercise of much judgment on the part of the practitioner.
It may be easily conceived that the severity of the regimen
must vary according to the constitution of the patient we have
to treat. Some subjects are soon weakened or rendered irri-
table by abstinence, or quickly placed in conditions favorable
to the action of remedies ; others, again, are not so readily
brought into such states ; and in some instances it becomes
necessaiy to resort to general bloodletting and the warm
bath. 2

14. In all local and constitutional venereal affections, our
first duty should be to examine the general condition of the
system of the patient, to ascertain the state of the viscera of
the chest and abdomen, and to place him upon such a regimen
as may be most likely to diminish the irritability of the system
generally, or of any one organ in particular. The bowels
should be kept free by the exhibition of mild, unirritating
purgatives, suited to the gastric constitution of the patient.

15. General bleeding should be employed as a preparatory

inveterate ; but it is particularly indicated where mercury has been used
without success, or where syphilis exists in a gouty or scrofulous consti-
tution. A decoction of the root of the " smilax china" is given for drink
to the extent of two pints in the day. (Expose de la Methode pour guerir
les Maladies veneriennes degenerees, par Osbeck; Stockholm, 1811.)
The commission appointed to examine into the merits of this plan of
treatment, decided that the cure was due to the regimen alone, and the
medical treatment had little or no effect. The Swedish physicians restrict
the " cura famis" to cases of constitutional, inveterate, or protracted syphi-
lis. In primary syphilis it is considered injurious, and is supposed to
favour the development of constitutional disease by rendering absorption
more active. For a further account of this mode of treatment, see
Bibliotheque Medicale, tomes 60 et 61. Journal de Hufeland, Juin
1817 'Quelques notices sur les Institutions medicates de Stockholm, et
sur le traitement par la Faim, usite dans les hopitaux de cette ville.' Gibert,
Manuel des Maladies veneriennes. Paris, 1837.

1 Plus vous nourrissez les corps impure, plus vous leur faites de mal.

s Lucas Championniere, La Therapeutique de la Syphilis, p. 115.



6



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



measure, when the circulating system of the patient is too
active, or the inflammation accompanying the local disease
acute.

16. The simple treatment attaches much importance to the
position of the patient, in the cure of venereal affections;
hence, whenever it is practicable, the patient should be con-
fined to bed. This has the advantage of keeping the skin
warm, and promoting perspiration, points of great importance,
whilst the recumbent position favours the return of blood up-
wards through the pelvis, and tends to mitigate any inflam-
matory action or tendency. This position also renders the
application of dressings much easier, and places the patient
in a more advantageous condition for the action of remedies.
In buboes, posthitis, acute or subacute gonorrhoea, ulcers on
the genitals, vegetations about the anus, affections of the
skin, &c, the recumbent position in bed, if not indispensable,
most materially facilitates the cure.

17. The warm bath is a modifying agent of great utility. 1
In a great variety of venereal affections the patient may use it
daily with advantage. The hip-bath, in many cases, from the
situation of the venereal affection, may supersede the necessity
of immersing the whole body. The patient may be directed
to remain in the bath an hour, or two, or more, according to
circumstances. Baths medicated with gelatin, starch, bran,
or the decoctions of poppy, henbane, or belladonna, may be
employed. General and local bleeding, low diet, aperients,
the warm bath, with repose in the recumbent position, consti-
tute the general simple treatment of syphilis ; and so efficacious
are these means in mitigating the irritations accompanying
primitive or secondary syphilitic affections that, of themselves,
they frequently work a cure. Where a mercurial, or other
specific treatment is adopted, the simple general treatment,
pursued at the same time, will be found most materially to
assist it, whilst by keeping the constitution in a state free from

1 See the Appendix for an account of the various kinds of baths recom-
mended and employed by the author.



SIMPLE TREATMENT.

irritability, it prevents the accidents to which a mercurial
course frequently gives rise.

18. As a good example of the mode in which the simple
treatment may be employed, we may refer to the practice
adopted by Dr. Roe, of the 39th regiment, as recorded in
Dr. Graves's « Clinical Medicine :' " The patients on their ad-
mission were purged with Epsom salts and tartar emetic, and
were ordered to apply a piece of lint wet with a solution of
the sulphate of copper to the sores, and to renew the applica-
tion every third hour, using a wet linen roller to keep the
parts clean, and retain the dressings. Milk diet, aperients
every third day, the parts frequently bathed with cold water,
particularly if pains existed in the groin. The chancres were^
occasionally touched with nitrate of silver, or sprinkled with
red precipitate, to expedite the cure. No mercury, except as
an aperient. Perfect rest in bed."

19. We shall now indicate some general rules for the
surgical treatment of syphilitic affections, considering the par-
ticular treatment with each separate form of disease. The
best antisyphilitic is frequently a dressing methodically made,
it being in vain that we attend to the constitutional treatment
of our patient, at the same time irritating or neglecting the
local disease.

20. Syphilitic sores should be daily cleansed, by a soft
sponge and tepid water, from the discharges which their sur-
faces secrete ; this should be done without creating any irri-
tation or pain, and care should be taken not to disturb any
parts undergoing a process of cicatrization. Syphilitic ulcers,
perhaps, more than any other kind, are liable from slight
causes to become irritable, and assume a phagedsenic character.
The dressings to these ulcers should be of the simplest kind ;
mild astringent and anodyne solutions generally succeed better
than the various kinds of ointments, particularly those which
contain mercury. The testimony of all modern authors is
decisive upon this point. The aromatic wine, with or without
tannin, appears to be one of the most generally useful appli-
cations to primary syphilitic sores, particularly adapted to



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



those which are bad conditioned, dark, and disposed to become
phagedsenic from the want of a reparative power in the tissues
where they are seated. 1

21. In the treatment of almost every form of primary sy-
philis, more particularly that of the ulcerated kind, local
bleeding by means of leeches should be adopted with extreme
caution. If leeches are applied in the vicinity of an inflamed
chancre, the bites will very probably become inoculated with
the virus, and fresh chancres be consequently produced. If,
again, as some writers recommend, leeches are applied in the
centre of a venereal sore, with a view of diminishing the in-
flammation which surrounds it, the tissues become poisoned
to the extent in which they have been divided by the bite of
the leech, and hence an extension of the ulcer in depth will
take place. Even in incipient bubo, swelled testicle, and other
of the consecutive symptoms of primary syphilis, an extensive
experience has taught us that local bleeding is not essentially
attended with very marked benefit. "We have other plans of
treatment to recommend, less tedious and more certainly suc-
cessful.

22. In inflammations of the testicle, and of the glands of
the groin, if leeches are employed they are more efficacious
placed directly upon the most painful part of the tumour, than
in the course of the spermatic vessels, or around its base.
M. Gama, chief surgeon to the military hospital of Yal de Grace,
observing the comparatively trifling effect of local bleeding on
buboes, &c, as it is generally employed, practises with more
success what he terms "saignee permanente." Instead of
applying a large number of leeches at once, as twelve, fifteen,
or more, he uses four or six, and when the bleeding begins to
diminish, reapplies the same number, so as to keep up a con-
stant flow of blood from the part for many hours.

23. Irritation is frequently kept up by the mere contact of

1 See the chapter " On the particular treatment of Primary Venereal
Sores," and the very ahle remarks of Mr. Key on this subject, in No. ix
of the ' Guy's Hospital Reports.'



SIMPLE TREATMENT.



9



two inflamed surfaces, notwithstanding an appropriate treat-
ment, in all other respects, may be methodically practised ;
hence, certain forms of superficial primary syphilis, or of
balanitis, 1 and posthitis, 2 are kept up by the contact of the
glans penis and prepuce, and some gleets protracted from the
contact of the two sides of the urethra. Fricke, of Hamburg,
first established this fact, which has been verified in the prac-
tice of Desruelles and Ricord ; the latter has frequently suc-
ceeded in curing obstinate gleets by introducing a small portion
of lint into the urethra, dry, or soaked in a mild astringent
solution. The prepuce and glans, when either is the seat of
irritation or ulceration, should always be separated by the in-
troduction of fine linen, or lint. The continued contact of the
glans and prepuce, when inflamed or ulcerated, frequently oc-
casions then* total or partial adherence.

24. Parts affected with syphilis which are deeply seated,
or covered by folds of integuments or mucous membrane,
should be daily cleansed by tepid anodyne or astringent in-
jections, according to the character of the accompanying irri-
tation. These injections should be practised quietly, without
force, and without creating pain.

25. Abscesses should be opened early, more particularly if
the presence of matter occasions much pain, or take place
under fascise or tendinous expansions, where the pus cannot
readily make its way to the surface. Long and deep sinuses
should be laid freely open, or if it be practicable, a counter-
opening may be made.

26. All parts in a state of natural or acquired strangulation
which offer impediments to the cure of syphilitic diseases
should be quickly relieved ; this becomes necessary in natural
or acquired phymosis or paraphymosis. The circumstances
which contra-indicate this practice will be mentioned under
the article on the particular diseases themselves.

1 Balanitis, from (3a\avog, glans ; inflammation of the glans penis.

s Posthitis, from iroarr], preputium, inflammation of the prepuce ; the
term balano-posthitis, where both glans and prepuce are inflamed, is em-
ployed by some modern writers on syphilis.

1 §



10



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



27. I have treated numerous patients, in private practice,
on the simple or rational plan, and the result of my experience
has shown, that where the primary sore has not been charac-
terized by an indurated base or edge, and has not left behind
it, in healing, any induration of the cicatrix, the relapses have
not been more frequent than under ordinary mercurial treat-
ments, and certainly not so frequent as when a mercurial
course has been irregularly followed, whilst the patient has
been saved much time, and been spared much inconvenience.
In these instances, also, the secondary or constitutional symp-
toms, when they have occurred, have generally been very mild,
consisting, for the most part, in red or slightly copper-coloured
patches (roseola), or small pustules thinly scattered over the
trunk, face, and extremities, with superficial inflammation, or
ulceration of the fauces. These symptoms have generally very
quickly disappeared under the use of the vapour and mercurial
bath, and there has been no farther mischief.



MERCURIAL TREATMENT.



I 1



CHAPTER II.

OF THE MERCURIAL TREATMENT OF SYPHILITIC DISEASES.

28. It is not my intention to enter into any of the contro-
versies respecting the mercurial or the simple treatment of
syphilis, but merely in this place to point out the circum-
stances which modern experience has indicated for its employ ;
for although mercury cannot be considered in any measure as
a specific against syphilis in any of its forms, still there are
numerous cases in which it is the most powerful and certain
therapeutic agent we can oppose to them.

29. Why is mercury to be employed in the treatment of
syphilis ? When is it to be employed ? In what manner is it
to be employed ? What are the states of the constitution, and
of the sore which are to guide us in pursuing its use or giving
it up? And when is it to be discontinued? These are the
practical questions which suggest themselves to us in reference
to the use of mercury in venereal diseases, and to them we
shall give the answers that modern experience has sanctioned.

30. Mercury is employed to facilitate the healing of a ve-
nereal sore, and to diminish the chance of secondary symp-
toms. 1 When (says Cullerier) the local applications before
mentioned are insufficient to produce the cicatrization of a
chancre, the patient must be placed upon a general mercurial
treatment. 2 The rapidity of the complete cure of several va-

1 Wallace, on the Venereal Disease and its Varieties, p. 100. Lond. 1838.

* Recherches pratiques sur la Therapeutique de la Syphilis, ouvrage
fonde sur les observations recueilles dans le service, et sous les yeux de
M. Cullerier, par Lucas Champonnierc. Paris, 1836.



12



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



rieties of venereal sores is enormously in favour of the mer-
curial treatment, whilst the number of secondary affections is,
by it, much diminished.

31 . Mercury may be used in the treatment of all primary
venereal sores, though it is not necessary to their cure, nor is
it used in the Parisian venereal hospitals, 1 when the sore heals
under the use of topical applications and an antiphlogistic
regimen, unless the healing of the sore leave behind it indura-
tion of the cicatrix.

32. Mercury is not to be used during the state of fever or
local inflammation which is present during the first days of
venereal ulcers, nor till our patient is prepared for it by low
diet, aperient medicines, or local or general bleeding. When
the fever and local inflammation or irritation which commonly
attend primary venereal sores are removed, when the process
of ulceration has stopped, and the sore remains indolent under
the use of topical applications ; above all, when its edges are
elevated and hard, mercury may be employed with the full
expectation of realizing its most beneficial results.

33. When a certain degree of induration accompanies a
chancre, or persists after its apparent cure, recourse may be
had to mercury, and, " as the mineral is frequently injurious
in some other forms of syphilis, so it is of use here." Mercury
may be employed in the absence of fever and local inflamma-
tion, when the sore has become indolent, and puts on no dis-
position to heal under ordinary local dressings. Dr. Wallace
resorted to mercury, in most cases of primary venereal sores,
when the process of ulceration had been arrested by the nitrate
of silver, or other caustics, when the sore had become indolent,
or assumed a disposition to heal. This author, recognizing
the grand principles above detailed, that we are not to employ
mercury in the earlier stages of chancre, whilst the constitution
and sore are irritable and are still suffering from the more im-
mediate effects of the venereal poison, says "great mischief

' Ricord, Traite des Maladies vcneriennes. pp. 578 et suivantes. Paris,
1838.



MERCURIAL TREATMENT.



13



frequently results from the topical employment of mercury, as
well as of other stimulants, during the stage of ulceration or
destruction of primary syphilis, by producing morbid excite-
ment, followed sometimes by indolent and sometimes by ir-
ritable action, with their concomitants and consequences. The
most appalling forms of this disease, which ever came under
my observation, were caused by the injudicious application of
the red precipitate, or other powerfully stinralating dressings,
and it has therefore long been a principle with me strictly to
avoid all mercurial and stimulating dressings during the ul-
cerating stage of syphilis. It is also in general highly im-
proper to administer mercury internally during this stage, for
if used at this period it may, instead of producing a salutary
and specific influence, increase the inflammation, or excite a
state of irritable or indolent action, after which the system will
become quite insensible to ordinary doses of this medicine ;
and if under such circumstances larger doses of mercury be
employed, a peculiar and complex state will most probably
result, determined in its character by the combined influence
of the disease, the remedy, and the constitution of the patient,
a state in which mercury acts as a poison, or in other words
not only aggravates all the symptoms, but perhaps excites a
new train of peculiar morbid actions." 1

34. Mercury is employed either in the form of ointment by
friction, or internally in various forms of preparation. I prefer
employing mercury by friction in primary venereal sores. I
order from a quarter of a drachm to a drachm and a half of
mercurial ointment at each friction, leaving an interval between
them of one, two, or three days, with the view of not irritating
either the sore or the constitution, by bringing the latter sud-
denly under the influence of the remedy. These frictions
may be made upon the insides of the thighs or legs, in the
inguinal region or popliteal space. Ricord frequently orders
the frictions to the axilla?, and they may be thus employed in
certain forms of venereal ulcerations of the mouth and fauces.



1 Op. cit. pp. 109-10.



14



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



Cullerier relates the histories of two cases cured by mercurial
frictions in this situation, which had resisted its employment
on other parts. As an internal remedy, in the primary ve-
nereal ulcer, the iodide and bicyanide of mercury are pre-
ferred in the Parisian venereal hospitals, as more certain in
their effects, and less irritating than either calomel or the
bichloride. The dose is from two to six grains a day, com-
bined with opium, to which antimony may be added with
advantage.

35. During the employment of mercury, the states of the
sore, of the constitution, of the mouth and breath, are to be
carefully watched, since each of them may assume certain
conditions which would render the further use of mercury
injurious.

36. The state of the sore whilst the patient is taking mer-
cury should be frequently examined, and topical applications
suited to its condition employed. At one time it may require
anodynes, at another astringents, or again slightly stimulating
applications may become necessary. During the mercurial
course, also, the diet should be nuld and unstimulating, and
the condition of the stomach and bowels carefully attended to.
Dr. "Wallace recommends the mastication and deglutition of
grains of allspice or pepper during the day, and covering the
abdomen with two or three folds of flannel. A nightly draught
or pill of some preparation of opium with capsicum 1 may be
employed with advantage, even during the period the patient
is using mercurial frictions ; the former not only prevent those
attacks of pain, griping, and diarrhoea which sometimes come

1 R. Pulv. Opii, gr. j.

Pulv. Capsici, gr. ij.
Conf. Aromat. q. s. ft. Pil.
Omni nocte sumend.

or,

R. Liq. Opii sedativ. in. xx. ad xxx.
Tinct. Capsici, im_ xxx. ad l.
Aquae Cinnaniouii, jj. M.ft. Haust. h. s.s.



MERCURIAL TREATMENT.



15



on during a mercurial course, and materially retard the healing
process, but they contribute directly to the therapeutic effects

of the mercury.

37. It is from a want of attention to these circumstances,
that persons are so frequently placed upon the mercurial plan
without being cured. This arises from their neglecting the
modifications of topical applications, and not observing the
dietetic regimen suited to then- state.

38. The condition of the sore is very frequently an indica-
tion of the effect of mercury upon the constitution, and points
out clearly whether it is agreeing with the system or not.
From this circumstance we recommend a frequent examination
of the local disease during the time the patient is using mercury.
" It will be found a most important rule in practice to omit
all mercurial treatment whenever there appears an increase of
inflammation or sensibility to arise in the local disease during
the employment of mercury, for a perseverance in its use )
under such circumstances, will almost inevitably tend to some
form of destructive action, determined in its character by the
constitution of the patient. In such cases we must have re-
course to emollient and anodyne applications, purgatives, rest,
abstinence, and diaphoretics, with or without narcotics, and
as soon as the morbid actions which have supervened have
been removed, mercury if necessary may be again resumed, to
be suspended afresh in case of a return either of inflammation
or irritability." 1

39. The state of the constitution as well as of the sore, de-
mands great watchfulness during the administration of mer-
cury for the cure of primary venereal sores. It is quite cer-
tain that venereal sores, which have resisted all other modes
of treatment, daily heal under the use of mercury, whilst the
remedy produces no sensible effect upon the economy either
by causing salivation or mercurial fever. We therefore insist
upon the principle, that the greater the degree of excitement
or of deviation from the healthy condition of any of the func-
tions which mercury produces, the greater is the danger of its

1 Wallace, op. cit. p. 119.



re



SYPHILITIC DISEASES,



action being followed by deleterious effects, or of its ceasing
to influence in a salutary manner the symptoms of syphilis.
It is from a knowledge of this fact that both Cullerier and
Kicord attend so much to the condition of the general health
during a course of mercury, by abstracting their patients from
all causes of excitement.

40. It is not necessary that mercury should produce saliva-
tion in order that its benefits, in curing primary syphilitic
ulcers, or diminishing the chance of secondary symptoms may
be realized. What then are the rules to guide us in these cir-
cumstances ? How long is our patient to be submitted to the
use of mercury, and when is it to be discontinued? The
healing of the sore, without a thickened condition of the cica-
trix is our rule for the discontinuance of mercury. This
remedy must be discontinued as soon as the traces of infection
are no longer evident. Some patients are not easily affected
by mercury, and their sores remain indolent even under its
long-continued use. In these cases it is well from time to
time to lay aside the mercury and treat our patient on general
principles, and again to have recourse to mercurial treatment
under some other form, if the disease still continue obstinate.
A change in the form of mercurial remedy exhibited is fre-
quently very efficacious, particularly in syphilitic diseases of
the skin, or in rebellious forms of ulceration. I have seen
the mercurial fume bath succeed after a complete treatment
by inunction and blue pill had failed ; and the bichloride in
small doses beneficial, when blue pill and calomel had been
taken without success.

41. We must not think of secondary symptoms after a sore
has healed under the influence of mercury, nor prolong the
treatment too far with a view of preventing them. Secondary
symptoms appear after the fullest courses of mercury, and
occasionally do not appear when mercury has been altogether
abstained from. 1

1 These paragraphs appear the most rational guide that can be given
for the discontinuance of a mercurial course. Dr. Colles continues it a
few days after all hardness of the cicatrix is removed, and thinks the mer-



MERCURIAL TREATMENT.



17



42. The state of the mouth should be carefully examined
before resorting to a course of mercury ; sometimes a stoma-
titis may be present before the administration of this remedy,
and we might thus be deceived in its effect, mistaking the in-
flammation of the mouth, which was previously in existence,
for one which is the result of mercury. It is quite certain
that many morbid conditions of the mouth and breath so closely
resemble those produced by mercury, that, without an exami-
nation of the mouth before resorting to a mercurial course, we
might be led into great error. 1

43. When the breath becomes fetid, and the gums tender,
the mercury must be discontinued, or very much diminished
in quantity. The patients should use slight astringent gar-
gles, with mineral acids, and lozenges of the chloride of lime. 2

44. M. Desruelles, surgeon to the military hospital of Val
de Grace, having the charge of the venereal department of
that establishment, and a partisan of the simple or physiolo-
gical treatment of syphilis without mercury, entertains the
following opinions as to its use, and gives certain rules for its
exhibition. Certain chancres, says he, of a phagedsenic or
Hunterian character with a hard base, or which leave behind

curial treatment should be continued to the extent of moderate ptyalism
for a month. Mr. Judd mentions, as the duration of the course, from
twenty-five to thirty days. I am firmly convinced that the patient is as
secure as he can be from secondary symptoms, by following the rule,
" to discontinue the mercury when the sore has healed, and all induration
of the cicatrix has disappeared."

1 See Ricord's remarks on this subject, op. cit. pp. 627-8.

2 R. Soda? chlorid. solutionis (Beaufoy's.)

Tinct. myrrhae, aa Jss.
Aquae %v. M. ft. garg.

R. Aquae destillata?, ^vij.

Aluminis et potassae sulph. 9ij.
Mellis rosarum, gj. M. ft. garg. — Ricord.

Lozenges of Chloride of Lime.— R. Calcis chlorid. 3iv ; sacchar. alb. ftj ;
amyli, Jiv; P. gum. tragacanthae, 3ij. M. Aquas aurautii quantum
sufficit. The mass is to be made into lozenges of three grains each.
Their use, principally in removing the mercurial factor of the breath.



18



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



them in healing an indurated cicatrix, are more frequently fol-
lowed by secondary symptoms, when treated without mercury,
than if this remedy had been given.

45. When venereal sores become stationary, or do not heal
under the simple treatment, and the exhibition of mercury is
not contra-indicated by the inflammatory or irritable condition
of the sore, or certain states of the constitution, mercury may
be advantageously used. Mercury, according to M. Desruelles,
is not to be employed when any of the viscera present symp-
toms of irritation, when the patient applies immediately after
having contracted his disease, or when the sore heals quickly
under the simple treatment.

46. Mercury maybe given Avhen the local inflammation ac-
companying a venereal sore has been subdued, and the patient
is prepared for its exhibition by diet and aperients, the sore
remaining indolent, of a bad aspect, and not healing or ap-
pearing to be influenced by the simple treatment. This
remedy may be also employed if the sores are complicated
with inflammation or enlargement of the glands of the groin,
or if any affection of the skin, as papular or other eruptions,
make their appearance during the simple treatment, and there
is reason to believe the constitution affected.

47. In many secondary affections, although generally trust-
ing to the simple treatment, Desruelles thinks the employ-
ment of mercury, particularly of the iodide, may be of ser-
vice. He merely states that if secondary symptoms appear
in an individual, who has for the primary form of the disease,
been treated fully by mercury, it is better to employ the
simple treatment, sudorifics, and attention to the general
health, than to have recourse again to the employment of
mercury. In secondary syphilis, which succeeds to a primary
affection treated without mercury, this remedy is almost always
necessary. A mild mercurial course in such instances is gene-
rally more efficacious than any other.



INOCULATION.



19



CHAPTER III.

ON INOCULATION, AS APPLIED TO THE DIAGNOSIS AND
TREATMENT OF SYPHILITIC DISEASES.

48. Both before and since the time of Hunter, inoculation
has been employed for the purpose of testing the character of
syphilitic diseases ; and at the present day, M. Ricord has de-
duced from an extended series of experiments, certain conclu-
sions of great value and importance, which he has given to
the world in bis great work ' Traite pratique des Maladies
Veneriennes, ou Recherches critiques et exp^rimentales sur
1' Inoculation, appliquee a 1' etude de ces maladies.' 1

49. M. Ricord establishes, in the first place, that a chancre,
wherever it may be seated, is produced by a specific matter
which is secreted by a chancre only, which matter produces a
similar disease whenever placed in circumstances favorable to
contagion.

50. This specific matter is only secreted from the surface
of a chancre during its first stage, that is, during the period
of ulceration, or when the sore is indolent or stationary. At
these periods only does a chancre secrete a specific matter ca-
pable of producing a similar disease by inoculation. When
the sore begins to heal and a process of reparation has com-
menced, it is merely a simple ulcer, does not furnish a spe-
cific secretion, and is not capable of propagation by inocu-
lation. 2

1 Paris, 1838.

3 It would appear that these views were likewise entertained hy Dr.
Wallace, who divides chancre into two distinct stages or phases, the first



20 SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



51. If matter be taken from a chancre during the period
of ulceration, and introduced under the epidermis by means
of a lancet, it produces the following effects : During the first
four and twenty hours the puncture becomes more or less in-
flamed; from the second to the third day it is accompanied
with slight tumefaction, and presents the appearance of a
small papula surrounded with a red areola ; from the third to
the fourth day the disease assumes a vesicular form, the epi-
dermis being raised by a fluid more or less opaque, presenting
at its apex a small dark point ; from the fourth to the fifth
day the contents of the vesicle become purulent, the apex of
the pustule depressed, resembling very much the pustule of
smallpox. At this period the areola, which had progressively
increased, begins to diminish or altogether disappears, parti-
cularly if the disease does not increase : after the fifth day,
however, the subjacent and surrounding tissues, which hithero
had undergone little or no modification or were merely slightly
cedematous, become indurated by the extravasation of a plastic
lymph, which communicates to the touch the resistance and
elasticity of cartilage. After the sixth day the contents of the
pustule thicken, the pustule itself shrivels up, and is covered
with crusts. These enlarge towards their base, and forming
by successive strata, at length assume the form of a truncated
cone with a depressed apex. If these crusts are detached, or
if they fall off, we find under them an ulcer with the hard
base of which we have spoken, extending through the whole
thickness of the skin. The surface of this ulcer, of a deep
red colour, is foul, covered with a thick adhesive pultaceous
matter, almost like a false membrane, which cannot be re-
moved by any attempt to clean the sore. The edges of the
ulceration at this period appear as though it had been dug
out from the surrounding parts by a sharp circular instrument.
The immediate vicinity of the sore is surrounded by a red,



one of ulceration, the second one of reparation ; he particularly insists
upon the impropriety and danger of administering mercury during the
first stage, that of ulceration.



INOCULATION.



21



dark, or livid margin, more elevated than the surrounding
parts.

52. M. Ricord further establishes that chancre in its com-
mencement is purely a local disease ; that constitutional or
secondary affections can only take place after this antecedent;
that they do not occur in all cases, and only after the lapse of
a certain period of time.

53. Whatever maybe the varieties and complications 'which
subsequently follow or accompany the inoculated chancre, the
progress of the latter is in all instances such as we have
described it. The pustular form of incipient chancre is only
wanting when the parts to which the virus is applied are des-
titute of epidermis or epithelium, and it is only preceded by
phlegmonoid inflammation when the matter has been intro-
duced into the subcutaneous cellular tissue, or into the lym-
phatic system.

54. The ulcerations completely destroyed or ai*rested on the
third, fourth, or fifth day from the application of poison are
not liable to secondary inflammation. It is not before the
fifth day that the induration of chancres commonly commences,
and it is the indurated chancre that is most frequently fol-
lowed by secondary symptoms ; this induration seems to indi-
cate that the affection has become in some measure already
constitutional ; as long as there is no induration we may sup-
pose the disease to be merely local.

55. The varied appearance which primary venereal sores
presents (says M. Ricord) has given rise to arguments against
the identity of the venereal virus, and has led to the promul-
gation of the theory of a plurality of venereal poisons. Inocu-
lation, however, sets this matter at rest, for whatever may
be the actual character of the sore from which we take the
pus, provided it be taken during the first stage of chancre,
that of ulceration or indolence, we obtain by inoculation a
regular pustule when the matter is introduced beneath the
epidermis or epithelium ; an ulcer when it is applied to a de-
nuded surface ; and an abscess when introduced into the cel-
lular tissue, or into the lymphatic system.



22



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



56. The various characters of chancres, or primary venereal
sores, are due to circumstances which are foreign to the spe-
cific cause which produced them; these are principally the
particular constitution of the patient, his mode of living, the
influence of any antecedent or present disease with which he
may happen to be affected, and not least the local treatment
of the sore. It is from one or many of these circumstances
that we see phagedeenic ulcers in subjects who have contracted
their disease from others affected with ulcers of the simplest
character.

57. The first stage of chancre, i. e. of ulceration or indo-
lence, is the only one during which the disease is susceptible
of propagation by inoculation ; the period of this stage is not
limited, hence M. Ricord has known primary venereal sores
capable of propagation after having continued eighteen months.

58. The researches of M. Ricord on the nature and diffe-
rential diagnosis of buboes are of equal interest with those
which we have detailed on the subject of primary sores. Ac-
cording to this author, buboes are of two kinds, simply in-
flammatory or virulent : in the first instance, succeeding to
gonorrhoea, balanitis or any other primitive affection ; and in
the second, from the consequences of the direct absorption of
specific matter from a chancre. To the pathology of bubo we
shall return in the chapter particidarly devoted to its consi-
deration ; in this place merely detailing the results obtained
by inoculation from buboes in a condition of ulceration.

59. M. Ricord deduces from his experiments upon buboes
in a condition of ulceration, the following conclusions : that
a virulent bubo, or one resulting from the absorption of the
specific pus from a chancre, is a disease precisely similar to
chancre, merely differing from it in its seat, and the anatomical
organization of the parts affected ; that this species of bubo
is the only one capable of producing a pustule by inocidation ;
that the symptoms hitherto indicated by authors, with a view
of establishing the differential diagnosis between a true virulent
bubo and one merely inflammatory, are of little value, inocu-
lation being the only certain and pathognomonic sign.



INOCULATION.



23



60. M. Ricord admits the existence of buboes which are
not preceded by any other syphilitic affection : these make
their appearance at a certain period after an impure connexion
without the intervention of chancres, gonorrhoea, balanitis, or
other form of primary irritation. The existence of these bu-
boes is also admitted by Fallopius, Astruc, Swediaur, Bertrande,
Gibert, and lately by Dr. Mondret, in a memoir inserted
in the " Eecueil p6riodique de la Societe cle Medecine," for
August 1837. These buboes are termed by the French sur-
geons "bubons d'emblee," and may be either simply inflam-
matory or syphilitic. M. Ricord insists that when these bu-
boes occur without the intervention of any antecedent form of
disease, it is impossible to judge of their true character without
the test of inoculation, and consequently impossible to heal
them rationally or well. He maintains that those only which
furnish the characteristic pustule of chancre by inoculation
are those only which are capable of being followed by secondary
symptoms. Those from which no pustule can be obtained by
inoculation are simply inflammatory, and must be treated on
general principles.

61. "With reference to the test of inoculation itself, some
degree of difference of opinion exists, although M. Ricord
states that the reason of this is, that the experiments have not
been made in a proper manner. On this point we consider
this author's opinions worthy of attention. Whenever inflam-
mation and suppuration of the cellular tissue, or lymphatic
glands of the groin, is owing to any other cause than the oc-
currence of chancre, the pus secreted furnishes no result from
inoculation, at whatever periods and under whatever circum-
stances the test may be made. Neither does it follow, of ne-
cessity, that buboes succeeding to true chancres will furnish
a specific pus ; and consequently, by inocidation, a charac-
teristic pustule. That this may occur, it is necessary that the
bubo shall not merely be owing to a simple sympathetic in-
flammation, but that actual absorption of the specific matter
of the chancre shall have taken place. When absorption of
the matter from a chancre on the genitals takes place, it is



24



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



generally confined to the superficial glands of the groin ; and
most frequently the syphilitic poison is conveyed to one gland
only, although many of the glands in the immediate vicinity
of the latter, both superficial and deep seated, are inflamed,
and suppurate at the same time, so that the matter taken from
one gland shall be purely syphilitic, and give rise, by inocula-
tion, to the characteristic pustule, •while those in its immediate
neighbourhood, and the cellular tissue, shall be affected by
simple phlegmonoid inflammation, the pus from which shall,
when tested by inoculation, give a negative result. 1

62. It may be very readily conceived, that the irritation
produced by the passage of the syphilitic poison through a
lymphatic vessel and ganglion may excite in the neighbouring
organs an inflammation which is not specific, but merely
phlegmonous, and this appears to be the true nature of the
case. M. Ricord opened a bubo which had succeeded to a
chancre, the pus from which produced no result by inoculation.
In the centre of the abscess he discovered an enlarged lym-
phatic gland, presenting an evident fluctuation ; this was
punctured and tested by inoculation, the characteristic pus-
tule of chancre was obtained.

63. Discharges from the urethra are of two kinds, resulting
either from the existence of a true syphilitic ulcer in some part
of the passage, or owing to gonorrhoea properly so called.
Chancres, or syphilitic ulcers of the urethra, to the considera-
tion of which we shall return in a particular article, are in all
respects, except situation, of the same character as other pri-
mary sores, and give rise to the same results when the matter
is tested by inoculation.

64. The matter of gonorrhoea, applied upon a mucous sur-
face, produces an inflammation and discharge of the same
character. In no instance can it produce a true syphilitic
sore ; although by remaining in contact with' a mucous surface
for a certain period of time, it may occasion a greater or less
degree of excoriation, but is not capable of producing a specific



' See Ricord, op. cit. pp. 142 et suivantes.



INOCULATION.



25



ulcer, as the researches of Ricord, 1 Hernandez, 2 and others,
incontestably prove.

65. The diseases which are consecutive to gonorrhoea, as
sympathetic buboes, &c, do not secrete pus capable of pro-
ducing a specific ulcer by inoculation, neither do secondary or
constitutional symptoms ever succeed to a simple gonorrhoea. 3
M. Ricord thinks that in the rare cases where secondary
symptoms have been said to have followed a simple gonorrhoea,
that the diagnosis of the primitive disease has been inexact,
that the diseased surfaces have not been properly examined,
and the cases have been concealed chancres of the urethra, and
not gonorrhoea. It is also extremely probable that such were
the forms of disease which embarrassed Dr. Wallace, who says
that he had met with some forms of discharges from the
urethra which were beneficially influenced by mercury, and
which he was unable to cure without its exhibition.

66. The pus of gonorrhoea, tested by inoculation, gives no
result; it may be followed by inflammation, but never pro-
duces a specific sore : injected into the urethra it produces a
disease like that of which it is the product : applied externally
between the glans and prepuce it occasions inflammation and
discharge, balanitis, or external gonorrhoea : a similar effect
follows its application upon other mucous surfaces.

67. We would here inquire what is the real position inocu-
lation occupies in reference to the therapeutics of primary
syphilis. Inoculation, pushed to its greatest extent by M.
Ricord, has proved, beyond a question, the fact which English
surgeons had always acted upon, though, we must admit, not
upon such good grounds as they do now, that syphilis is a

> Memoires, sur quelques Faits observes h. l'Hdpital des Ve'ne'riens, par
P. Ricord. Memoires de l'Academie Royale de Medecine, tome 2»«

2 Essai analytique sur la Nonidentite des Virus gonorrhoique et syphili-
tique ; par J. F. Hernandez. Toulon, 1812.

3 Such is M. Ricord's statement. Secondary symptoms of mild charac-
ter do succeed to discharges from the urethra, where there is no reason to
suspect the existence of ulceration. We shall in subsequent pages have to
instance some very curious examples of this.

2



26



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



specific disease, and not the result of the ordinary forms of
irritation. M. Ricord has proved that certain sores, when
tested by inoculation, produce a pustule running through cer-
tain stages, and terminating in a specific ulcer, capable of
being propagated, ad infinitum, by the same means. M. Ricord,
however, has only shown that certain ulcers produce a cha-
racteristic pustule by inoculation, and therefore should be
those only which are truly specific ; yet we find other sores,
the result of sexual intercourse, succeeded by secondary symp-
toms of the worst kind, and also yielding magically, in some
instances, to mercury, when all other remedies had failed ; the
old Hunterian test of true syphilis.

68. In the present state of science all we can say is, that
certain ulcers, the result of sexual intercourse, and not dis-
tinguishable by their external characters from other ulcers
equally the result of sexual intercourse, yield a characteristic
pustule by inoculation ; but the ulcers which do not yield the
characteristic pustule are equally liable to be followed by se-
condary symptoms, and are equally benefited, under many
circumstances, by mercury.



27



CHAPTER IV.

OP THE FIRST CLASS OF PRIMARY SYPHILITIC DISEASES 1

GONORRHCEA, ITS VARIETIES AND CONSEQUENCES.



OF BALANITIS.

INFLAMMATION OF THE GLANS PENIS EXTERNAL OR FALSE GONORRHOEA
CHANCR0TJS EXCORIATION, ETC.

69. This disease is characterized by more or less redness,
and a muco-purident discharge from the surface of the glans
penis, with or without excoriation. Balanitis rarely occurs
alone, but is more frequently complicated with a similar con-
dition of the internal surface of the prepuce (posthitis). It is
then termed balano-posthitis. As it is rare to see the affections
separate, I shall consider both under the title of balanitis.

70. This affection may have a purely venereal origin, or Causes of
may succeed to connexion with women labouring under balanitis,
leucorrhcea, or other simply inflammatory affections of the
vagina, or when this part is covered with secretions of a

more or less irritating character. The menstrual discharge
will also frequently occasion balanitis, and I have frequently
seen great anxiety arise to married men who have suffered
from balanitis, the result of connexion with their wives in
one or other of the above-mentioned states. Balanitis some-
times owes its origin to a natural conformation of parts, and
hence subjects with a natural phymosis, or small preputial
opening, may be considered as predisposed to it.

aflrm?^' f ffections non ^tes.-W^. Maladies primitives
a forme erythemateuse,-^^. Catarrhal primary syphilis,- W^ac,



28



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



71. The treatment of uncomplicated balanitis is extremely
simple. When the glans can be denuded, and the inflam-
mation is not very acute, M. Ricord passes the solid nitrate
of silver slightly over the surface, covers it with a piece
of fine soft linen, and then brings the prepuce forwards over
the glans. The penis should be covered with linen compresses
soaked in cold water, or the liquor plumbi diacetatis dilutus,
and the linen between the prepuce and glans renewed twice in
the day ; at each renewal of the linen, the parts should be
washed with an astringent lotion. 1 It will be occasionally
found that lotions of all kinds tend to keep up the irritation.
When this is the case, the surface of the glans should be
thickly dusted with an astringent powder ; 2 this tends to allay
the irritation, by absorbing the acrid secretions, and preventing
any friction between the glans and prepuce. If the inflam-
matory symptoms accompanying balanitis run high, and are
complicated with phymosis, leeches may be applied in the groin
or perineum, aperients administered, and the patient should
keep quiet, and live low. Injections of the nitrate of silver,
or an aqueous solution of opium, may be thrown up be-
tween the glans and prepuce. In cases where balanitis,
thus complicated, terminates in gangrene, or this is threaten-
ing, Ricord recommends the free exhibition of opium, either
by the mouth, or united with camphor in form of enema.
Desruelles speaks highly of continued injections or irrigations
in balanitis, or balano-posthitis, resorted to when these diseases
are complicated with phymosis. To accomplish this, a small
canula may be fitted to one of Weiss's self-acting enema
syringes ; the canula, which should be made of caoutchouc or
elastic gum, is to be passed between the glans and prepuce,
and thus, without removing it, a continued stream of some



ft. Plumbi acetatis, 3j.

Aqua; destillatae, ^viij. M. ft. lotio. — Ricord.

ft. Plumbi subcarbonat.
Pulvis cinchona;, iia ^j.
Pure tannin, gr. v. M. ft. pulvis.



BALANITIS.



29



narcotic or astringent injection 1 may be thrown gently up for
some minutes together. 2

72. The causes of external gonorrhoea are to be sought Phymosis
for in the natural conformation of the penis on the part a cause -
of the male, and various morbid conditions of the vagina
on the part of the female. A natural phymosis predisposes
the patient to contract this form of disease ; for instance,
a person having natural phymosis cohabits with a female
having various morbid discharges from the vagina ; the dis-
charge gets under the prepuce, and is there retained, as the
patient cannot withdraw it to wash the part ; the discharge ex-
cites inflammation of a more or less active character, which
woidd all have been avoided if the glans could have been re-
tracted and the part washed with a little soap and water. The
secretion of the glandulte odoriferse, as they are termed, also
of itself produces a form of balanitis, without even exposure
to impure connexion. This secretion, which, in some persons,
is extremely abundant and offensive, is retained by the elon-
gated prepuce on the base and surface of the glans, there irri-
tating and inflaming the parts, and ultimately producing ad-
hesions between the glans and prepuce. Sometimes, when
there is a very narrow preputial opening, and the discharge
cannot make its way out, large collections of matter are formed,
and the patient, unless an operation is performed, is only re-
lieved by gangrene, or sloughing of the whole prepuce. I

' R. Decoct, papaveris, h. ij.

Aluminis ust. gr. xx. M. ft. injectio. — Desruelles.
Simple tepid water, with alum in the proportion of eight or ten grains
to the pint, forms an exceedingly usefnl injection, particularly where large
quantities are used.

s R. Cerati simplicis, vel mellis,
Olei oliva;, aa Jj.
Hydrargyri chlorid. 3ss.
Ext. opii, 3j. M.

The ahove preparation may be introduced between the glans and pre-
puce by means of a camel-hair pencil ; a remedy of great value.



30 SYPHILITIC DISEASES.

have been called to several cases where such a termination has
taken place.

foruSofy? 73 ' ° Mef ° aUSeS ° f balanitis are t0 be sought for in the
ginitis, & c " conditlon of the female vagina. "In examining the vulva,
common vagina, or neck of the uterus, in females labouring under dis-
balanitis char S es wludl W Produced balanitis or gonorrhoea in the
male, we have observed the mucous membrane covered with
papulae or follicles, more or less developed, constituting a
papular vaginitis or utero-vaginitis, sometimes assuming tbe
form of small spots, in size not larger than a pin's head, iso-
lated, or more or less confluent. On the same portion of the
mucous membrane we have distinctly seen patches more or less
numerous, and varying in extent, which have a striking analogy
with the suppurating surfaces of the skin on which a blister
has been applied. Again, in some forms of Menorrhagia in
the female, we find the mucous membrane of the vagina of an
uniformly red colour. At other times the redness occurs in
isolated patches, with swelling, heat, and pain, unattended by
any secretion. Other cases of this kind give rise to a morbid
secretion, the colour and consistence of which are variable.
The differences in the character of the secretions appear to
have no reference to the causes which have produced them.
The discharges from the urethra, vulva, vagina, and uterus,
are very various ; but the difference has not appeared con-
nected with anyone particular lesion more than another. Tbe
acute stage generally, whatever may be the particular lesion,
causes at its commencement a secretion almost wholly serous,
or only consisting of mucus more abundant than usual, wbich
afterwards becomes opaque, purulent, or of a darkish yellow
colour, sometimes green, sometimes mixed with blood. The
chronic stage often gives rise to a milky secretion of a thickish
consistence, similar to that of cheese, or simply to a mucous
flux. Tbe chronic discharges also may put on a rusty ap-
pearance, and become tinged with larger or smaller quantities
of blood. Tbese secretions, whether in the acute or cbronic
stage, may have no smell, or, on the contrary, may have a very
unpleasant odour, particularly where the mucous papulse exist.



BALANITIS.



31



The smell is often so decided, that it is characteristic in a great
number of cases." The only differences which result from the
particular sort of the Menorrhagia are, that the secretions
which come from the uterus are always more mucous, thready,
and collected into flocculi ; whereas those which escape from
the urethra, vulva, or vagina, present a less tenacious character
than the others." 1

74. These forms of vaginitis sometimes occur in patients
of the highest respectability, and are capable of producing
balanitis in the male. I have seen one or two instances where
an inflamed and irritable condition of the vagina in the female,
during the latter months of pregnancy, has produced balanitis
in the husband, and where a great deal of family distress has
been occasioned by the circumstance. The forms of disease
on the part of the female I have just enumerated will produce
external gonorrhoea, and also gonorrhoea properly so called.
Both gonorrhoea and ordinary leucorrhcea recognize the same
pathology, i. e. a vaginitis assuming various forms, accom-
panied by discharges also of varied character ; yet in the one
instance, that of the impure female, we see gonorrhoea in both
its forms, external and internal, constantly produced in the
male ; whilst in the other, that of the respectable married
female, cohabitation takes place almost with impunity, as far
as contracting disease is concerned. Hence it has been at-
tempted to establish a differential diagnosis between the two,
in which all have equally failed. Hunter, Clarke, and Churchill
have failed in doing so, and since the speculum has been so
much employed no additional light on the subject has as yet
been given.

75. We must decide, in these instances, by the effects pro-
duced, by the facts before us, and not on the grounds of any
(l priori reasoning. "When we see that blenorrhagia, or the
various forms of vaginitis with muco-purulent discharge in the
married female, on the one hand, exist for a longer or shorter
period, for months, or even years, without producing the



1 Acton on Venereal Diseases, pp. 172-3.



32



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



slightest affection on the part of the husband, or on that of
any child which may happen to be born during the continuance
of the disease, and observe, on the other hand, forms of
vaginitis precisely similar to those which I have mentioned in
the impure female, producing balanitis, gonorrhoea, and all
their attendant consequences, we must be disposed to admit
something specific in the latter case, some form of morbid
poison which does not exist in the first.

76. " Between the muco-pus of a pure gonorrhoea and the
pus or muco-pus of other discharges, there is a difference pre-
cisely similar to that which exists between the pus of a chancre
producing a characteristic pustule by inoculation, and the pus
of other sores consequent upon sexual intercourse, which
does not give this result, although no chemical or physical
circumstances are capable of showing in what this difference
consists." 1

Symptoms. 77. The symptoms of balanitis are heat, itching, and red-
ness of the glans penis and the inner surface of the pre-
puce, the redness being disseminated in patches, as though
the surface of the part had been slightly scalded with drops
of hot water sprinkled over it. These symptoms are accom-
panied by a muco-purulent discharge from the preputial
opening, and if the glans can be denuded, its whole surface
and that of the prepuce are covered with an adhesive flaky
matter looking like curd. This is the condition if the glans
can be denuded ; if it cannot, all we generally observe is a
muco-purulent discharge from the preputial opening, though
not from the urethra, with heat and swelling at the end of the
penis. In fact, the balanitis itself is the most common cause
of our not being able to denude the glans penis ; the inflam-
mation produces the phymosis, which was not present till
the balanitis was contracted. Again, the phymosis may be
congenital.

Differential 78. Discharges from the end of the preputial opening,
diagnosis, however, with a natural or acquired phymosis, are not all

1 Baumes, Precis sur les Maladies Veneriennes, vol. i, p. 208.



BALANITIS.



33



dependent upon balanitis, as I have described it. They
may result, and commonly do result, from a chancre or
ulcer, situated either on the glans or prepuce, and pro-
ducing the inflammation with the discharge from the pre-
putial orifice. If an ulcer of any standing be the cause of
the mischief, we can generally detect it from a partial indura-
tion felt at the same part of the prepuce under the skin, and a
peculiar soreness and tenderness existing in this part, when
the penis is pressed or rolled between the fingers. These
would be the distinctive symptoms to guide us in a differential
diagnosis between phymosis with chancre, and phymosis the
result of pure balanitis, since both diseases m ould be cha-
racterized by the same or pretty nearly the same general
symptoms ; viz. swelling and heat of the end of the penis,
with phymosis and discharge from the preputial opening. A
balanitis might again exist with a pure gonorrhoea ; this is very
common, but in this instance the discharge from the urethra
can be seen. I mention these complications of balanitis, be-
cause their existence with balanitis would materially modify
the treatment. They would, when existing, become the epi-
phenomena of the disease ; i.e. its most important features, re-
quiring principally the special direction of the therapeutic agent.

79. Balanitis is in many if not in most instances, com- Operation
phcated with phymosis, and the question naturally arises f or phy-
whether this is to be relieved by an operation or not. If mosis '
the phymosis be a congenital one, and the patient have
contracted a balanitis, in most instances the operation shoidd
be performed, as the continuance of the phymosis pre-
disposes the patient to a number of those inconveniences
mentioned before, adhesions between the glans and pre-
puce, and thickening of the latter from chronic inflamma-
tion. If the phymosis be an acquired one, produced by the
disease, the operation should not be performed. Poultices,
cold lotions, purgatives, and, above all, the calomel and opium
pommade, will in a few days, in almost every case, enable us to
retract the prepuce. An operation in the latter case is un-
warrantable, whilst in the former it is not only justifiable, but

2§



34



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



highly advantageous. We shall have more to say of the opera-
tion for phymosis when speaking of primary venereal sores
complicated with it ; but in cases of uncomplicated balanitis,
the rules I have given are safe, and have been proved by
myself time after time in practice. Balanitis may, if neglected
or badly treated, continue for an indefinite period of time,
may run on into conditions of superficial ulceration, may pro-
duce adhesions of the prepuce to the glans, either partial or total,
thickening of the prepuce, and, according to Roux, cancer of
the penis. Again, it commonly produces enlargement of the
glans in the groin, and occasionally bubo. I have seen the
latter in one or two instances.
Secondary 80. Secondary symptoms may succeed to simple balanitis,
symptoms. an( j gome mo dern authors have recorded examples of the
fact. If balanitis or chancrous excoriation is suffered to
continue for an indefinite period of time, a thickening of
the diseased surface always occurs, and a chronic suppura-
tion is established from the abrasion covering the thickened
part. In this state of things secondary symptoms will
occur in the male, and may be produced in the female,
when cohabitation is permitted under such circumstances.
I have seen eruptions accompanied by a node on the fore-
head, loss of the hair, and other symptoms of constitutional
syphilis, produced in the wife, where this species of abrasion,
with thickening, were the only symptoms in the husband.
Some cases have been brought forward in which constitutional
symptoms, characterized by copper-coloured patches and pa-
pulae, succeeded to balanitis or discharge from the external
surface of the glans and from the prepuce, without ulceration
or breach of surface. In the cases mentioned, this external
gonorrhoea was followed by the falling off of the hair, and
eruptions precisely similar to those which follow primary ve-
neral sores, and these complaints were curable only by mercury.
In the first case, the patient had never before any venereal
affection till be contracted a balanitis characterized by redness,
heat, and itching, of the external surface of the prepuce, to
which succeeded a purulent discharge.



BALANITIS.



35



81. This form of disease is considered by many mo- Case,
dern writers as a variety of gonorrhoea, differing from the
urethral variety merely in its seat. In the cases already alluded
to, this external gonorrhoea or balanitis was followed by falling
off of the hair, and eruptions, precisely similar to those which
succeed to venereal sores, and were curable only by mercury.
In the first case, the patient had never before had any vene-
real affection till he contracted a balanitis characterized by
redness, heat, and itching, of the external surface of the glans
penis and neighbouring portion of the prepuce, to which suc-
ceeded a purulent discharge, without any kind of excoriation
or wound. This was succeeded, in a fourth case, "by copper-
coloured patches on the forehead and chest ; and a female, with
whom this patient cohabited, became affected with heat and
swelling of the genitals, pain in making water, and, two
months after, an eruption on the inside of the thighs, the
nose, and the forehead. The female was declared diseased ;
put on the use of mercury, with sarsaparilla, and recovered.
The first patient (the male) took to himself a second mistress,
still siuTering from the affection (balanitis), which he did not
consider syphilitic, the first mistress having married after
recovery. This second mistress soon became affected with the
same symptoms as the first, and, two or three months after,
a constitutional affection made its appearance, which ultimately
assumed a pustular form. The prospect of an advantageous
marriage presented itself, and our patient now separated from
his second mistress and married. In a short time the wife was
affected as her temporary substitutes had been before, and sub-
sequently with eruptions of a like character. The patient and
his wife now put themselves under medical care ; and the sur-
geon stated that the only disease in the genitals with which
the husband was affected was redness of the glans penis, with
purulent discharge 5 no ulceration, breach of surface, or trace
of cicatrix. The patients were put upon mercurial treatment,
and both perfectly recovered." These primary forms of disease
in the glans and prepuce, marked or characterized by dis-
charges, without ulceration, have of late been supposed to be



36



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



precisely identical in their character with gonorrhoea, differing
from it only in their seat. We are inclined, from observation,
however, to believe, in many instances this analogy is not
correct, though it may hold good in some, since what appears
a mere catarrhal affection in the first instance, frequently de-
generates into ulceration more or less extensive. Many modern
surgeons of experience in the matter we are now considering,
state that simple balanitis may produce a chancre, and thus
induce secondary symptoms.

82. A very marked example of this occurred in a patient
now in the Queen's Hospital ; he was admitted for simple
balanitis. On examining him a few days after, I was surprised
to see a crop of small ulcers on the prepuce. I have in
private practice, not only in one, but in several instances, seen
a superficial sore appear before a patient was well of the
balanitis, and this sore followed by a bubo ; in these instances
a fresh infection was impossible. The distinctions are perhaps
not very clearly defined between a pure catarrhal inflammation
of the glans and prepuce, and those very mild forms of syphilis
which some writers have termed superficial. Dr. "Wallace has
recorded a case bearing upon this point, which, in a practical
point of view, is so instructive, that I shall introduce it here.

"A lady was brought to Dublin on account of an erup-
tion, and a state of general ill health. She had been some
months married, and was pregnant. The eruption did
not appear of a doubtful character. It was a syphilitic erup-
tion, of a rubeoloid form, and was accompanied by its almost
constant attendants, a superficial disease of the fauces and a
condylomatous state of the pudenda and of the orifice of the
anus. There were, also, small condylomata in the axillae. I
communicated my opinion to the husband of the lady, who
had accompanied her to town, and he denied that he had ever
had any venereal disease ; but he at the same time admitted,
that some months before bis marriage he had got, in conse-
quence of a suspicious intercourse, what he called a chafing ;
that he had consulted Mr. M., who directed for him a wash,
by which the disease was removed ; that he had been assured



BALANITIS.



37



by this gentleman that the complaint was not venereal, and
did not require mercury ; and that he had taken the precau-
tion of submitting himself to examination before marriage,
with the view of making his mind sure that he had no venereal
taint ; but, on examining him, I found a very slight oozing at
the corona, with a very slight thickening of the corresponding
portion of the lining of the prepuce ; and there existed on
some parts of his body slight cutaneous desquamations of a
suspicious character." 1 The lady miscarried of a dead child,
and the husband and wife were placed under mercurial treat-
ment and recovered.

83. Balanitis is exceedingly liable to return, without any evi- R ecurre nce
dent cause, after it has been supposed to be cured. It breaks out of the dis-
again and again, at uncertain intervals, showing the irritation y^ 0 u S n
still to exist which produced it in the first instance. Sometimes forms,
the irritation reappears in its original form, sometimes it gives
rise to herpes preputialis, or to eczema of the glans, or to minute
and superficial ulcerations, which, after repeated returns, leave
behind them some thickening, which may give rise to mild
constitutional symptoms, and is capable of producing disease
in the female, as the preceding remarks and cases fully show.
In such cases the patients nmst be put on general treatment,
a mild mercurial course, the hydriodate of potass with sarsa-
parilla, and the mercurial vapour-bath.



1 Wallace, pp. 229-30.



38



CHAPTER V.



OF GONORRHOEA.



84. Gonorrhoea, a disease of daily occurrence, is perhaps
as much or more than any other presented to the surgeon,
the source of annoyance to him, and anxiety and weariness
to his patient. This, we apprehend, arises in a great measure
from the want of a correct knowledge of its modifications and
varieties, 2 and consequently an uncertainty in the treatment



1 Urethritis, acute or chronic,— Besruelles. Blenorrhagia, — Swediaur.
Venereal or syphilitic catarrh, — Wallace.

2 Varieties of gonorrhoea, — Ricord.



First species — Gonorrhoea in the female :



Varieties, seated in «



the vulva,
the vagina,
the uterus,
the urethra,



may exist alone, or variously
combined.



Second species — Gonorrhoea in the male :

{the urethra, ~\

on the prepuce, or I ^S^J^SlS

the glans penis, J



variously combined.



Hecker, 'Des differentes especes des Gonorrhees,' has described the
following varieties :

1. Ordinary or specific gonorrhoea.

2. Consecutive gonorrhoea (gleet).

3. Gonorrhoea accompanying syphilis (probably depending on chancres
of the urethra). —



GONORRHffiA.



39



more especially adapted to its different forms. Gonorrhoea
consists in inflammation, more or less acute, of the mucous
membrane of the urethra, or other parts of the genito-urinary
passages, accompanied by the secretion of a muco-purulent
fluid of a yellow or greenish appearance ; pain, itching, or
irritation in voiding the urine, with, in the male, repeated and
involuntary erections of the penis.

85. Tbe discharges from the male urethra which are pro-
duced by sexual intercourse may be reduced to three, and
these I term, simple gonorrhoea, ordinary or specific go-
norrhoea, and gonorrhoea which is the result of a venereal
sore in the urethra. These three kinds are different in the
causes which they recognize, their pathology, mode of treat-
ment, comphcations, and consequences.

86. Simple gonorrhoea results from cohabitation with females
during the menstrual period, or when they are labouring under
inflammatory or diseased states of the vagina or os uteri ; which

4. Gonorrhoea accompanying scurvy.

5. Gonorrhoea accompanying scrofula.

6. Gonorrhoea dependent upon or kept up by rheumatism.

7. By gout.

8. Accompanying various local exanthemata.

9. Accompanying hemorrhoids.

10. Produced by certain conditions of the urine. The crystals of
oxalate of lime present in the urine — oxaluria.

11. By masturbation, &c.

12. By continence.

13. By causes acting directly on the parts affected.

14. By sympathy.

15. Occurring in females after delivery.

Most if not all of these varieties must be recognized by those familiar
with diseases of this character. Many of them are dependent on specific
or ordinary gonorrhoea occurring in certain constitutions ; thus, tbe ordi-
nary specific gonorrhoeas, in habits confirmedly rheumatic, gouty, scorbutic,
or scrofulous, form varieties of the disease which require most important
modifications in treatment.



40



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



furnish discharges of a more or less acrid or irritating nature.
These gonorrhoeas are not capable of propagation in the same
way that an ordinary specific gonorrhoea generally is ; in fact,
they are not contagious. Many writers have endeavoured to
discover some distinguishing marks between gonorrhoea, and
other discharges from the female which we may call leucor-
rhceal, and which, under certain circumstances, give rise to
simple gonorrhoea in the male. That differences do exist in
the nature of these discharges on the part of the female we
are perfectly convinced ; differences which the speculum cannot
distinguish, but which are evident in their effects upon the
male. These various discharges produce in the male, occa-
sionally, a disease which may be termed simple gonorrhoea,
totally different from a specific gonorrhoea in duration, in-
tensity, and consequences ; and, still further, not to be cured
by the same remedies.

87. The late Mr. B. Bell was of opinion that discharges
from the male urethra, accompanied by heat and scalding on
making water, may succeed to connexions with women suffering
from fluor albus. 1 He merely remarks, that such discharges
generally subside much more quickly than an ordinary go-
norrhoea. He mentions its continuance from this cause eight
or ten days, and cautions young practitioners against giving
precipitate opinions on such cases. I have frequently been
consulted by persons labouring under discbarges of this cha-
racter, which have been communicated by females with whom
they had been in the habit of cohabiting, and who had never
perceived any disease till they visited their mistresses after
dining out and drinking freely ; then a discharge, with scalding
on micturition, has been set up, which has continued a few
days, been rendered worse by specific remedies, and yielded to
low diet, aperients, and an injection.

88. We believe, with the best pathologists of the day, that

1 See a remarkable case recorded by him, vol. i, p. 425, of his Treatise
on the Venereal Disease.



GONOKRHCEA.



41



gonorrhoea, though the result of impure cohabitation, and
hence termed a venereal disease, is an affection of a totally
different character to the primitive syphilitic ulcer. We do
not believe the opinions of the late Dr. Wallace and others to
be true, that syphilis and gonorrhoea are varieties of the same
disease ; 1 modern testimony, drawn from the results of inocu-
lation, universally proving that the pus of chancre has never
produced gonorrhoea, and the reverse. 2

89. The causes of gonorrhoea are various : the most fre- Causes

... . gonorrhoea

quent, however, is cohabitation with a female affected with

the same disease. It is certain that inflammation, with muco-
purulent discharge from the urethra, may be the result of con-
nexion with women who labour under various forms of disease,
such as inflammation of the vagina, the lochial or menstrual
discharges, fluor albus, ulcerations of various kinds not syphi-
litic, different morbid conditions of the os uteri, amongst which
Cullerier and Ratier specially mention the cancerous ulcer. It
appears to me evident that, in the present state of science, it
is impossible with certainty to ascertain what may be the true
cause of that gonorrhoea which succeeds to cohabitation, unless
the female be submitted to examination with the speculum :
and hence M. Ricord states that no confidence is to be placed
upon any statements of this character, unless the speculum
have been employed as a means of confirming our diagnosis ;
the condition of the constitution also at the time of exposure
to infection must be ranked as a predisposing cause. Gonor-
rhoea is also due to other causes apart from sexual intercourse,
as masturbation, habitual costiveness, inflammation of the
prostate gland, certain morbid conditions of the bladder or
ureters, particularly the presence of calculi in these parts,
piles, the excessive or immoderate use of wine or fermented
Hquors generally, and the warmer spices, more particularly
cayenne pepper. In chddren this affection is sometimes de-

1 On the Venereal Disease, &c, p. 284, and elsewhere.
s See Ricord, and the authors quoted by him in his work already re-
ferred to ; also Cullerier, in Lucas Championniere's work, p. 384, &c. &c.



42 SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



pendent upon teething or intestinal worms. It also recog-
mzes for its cause a gouty or scorbutic diathesis, or succeeds
to the suppression of habitual discharges, or the cure of old
standing cutaneous eruptions. In addition to all these causes,
which are strictly internal, gonorrhoea is produced by external
violence or injuries to the penis, and the operation of a second
class of causes of various kinds which are external.
Pathology. 90. Gonorrhoea consists in an inflammation more or less
diffused of the mucous membrane of the urethra, &c. Dr.
Wallace considers this inflammation, from its diffused or erratic
character, to be of the erysipelatous kind ; hence Desruelles
terms it "inflammation eryth£mateuse." The inflammation
does not commonly affect the whole surface of the urethral
mucous surface; when it does so, it assumes the name of
"gonorrhoea virulenta," 1 and is generally accompanied with
violent symptomatic fever. The points in which the inflam-
mation remains most commonly fixed, or in which it is mani-
fested with greatest intensity, are the fossa navicularis, and
the vicinity of the bulb : this arises from the anatomical dis-
position of the mucous membrane, which, in this situation,
is much more intimately adherent to the erectile tissue beneath
it. Gonorrhoea! inflammation may be diffused over a wide
surface, and " may involve at the same time the whole of the
urethra, the bladder, the testicles, the glans and prepuce in
the male ; and in the female the nymphse, clitoris, labise,
vagina, &c. ; and thus commencing at the preputial end of
the penis, in the fossa navicularis, it not unfrequently creeps
slowly on to the posterior parts of the urethra, to the bladder,
or to the testicles, while it decreases or ceases entirely in the
parts first affected." 2 It may be confined to the mucous
membrane itself, or extend to the tissues beneath it ; in the
latter instance the irritation constantly determines a flow of
blood into the cells of the erectile tissue of the corpora caver-

' The term gonorrhoea virulenta is restricted by some modern authors
to discharges dependent on a venereal sore in the iu - ethra.
2 Wallace, pp. 237-8.



*



GONORRHCEA.



43



nosa and corpus spongiosum, which occasions a continual
tension of the penis. Occasionally the inflammation becomes
located in some part of the canal, producing thickening, effu-
sion into the submucous cellular tissue, and in some cases
ulceration ; in these forms the disease assumes more of a local
character, and is not so much disposed to spread by continuity
of tissue.

91. The general symptoms of gonorrhoea are too well known Symptoms,
to need description, yet those which indicate its localization

in particular parts of the urethra may be detailed with advan-
tage. When the disease is confined to the fossa navicularis,
it is only in this portion of the passage that uneasiness or pain
is felt when the patient voids his urine ; the glans is more or
less swollen, and its lips tumefied and red. On pressing and
rolling the urethra between the thumb and finger, a distinct
thickening is felt, as though a portion of a sound had been
introduced into the urethra ; the pressure is also painful to
the patient. The greater and more marked the thickening of
the urethra in this situation the stronger is the presumption
that the disease is localized there, and does not extend to other
portions of the canal. The discharge, under these circum-
stances, is trifling, though very teasing to the patient ; it is
constantly presented at the orifice of the urethra. When the
inflammation predominates, or is fixed in the straight portion
of the urethra, between the glans and the bulb, the patient
has no pain in the perineum, but he experiences severe pain
in making water, has frequent erections of short duration, and
the discharge is more copious than when the disease is confined
to the fossa navicidaris.

92. If the disease be located in the bulbous portion of the
urethra, the patient has pain in the perineum increased by
pressure, a constant desire to void his urine, with frequent
erections of the penis. The discharge is abundant, accompa-
nied with great pain, and the stream of urine is diminished.
When the membranous portion of the urethra is chiefly affected,
the pain is severe in the perineum and the neighbourhood of
the anus ; the desire to void the urine is in many cases con-



44

SYPHILITIC DISEASES.

stmt The prostate and testicles are commonly enlarged ard
painful, the spermatic vessels congested, as well as the vasa
deterentia. Consecutive diseases of the bladder, prostate, and
testicles are more frequently to be feared when the gonorrhoea
occupies principally the two last-mentioned seats.
Sympa- 93. During the course of a gonorrhoea the patient is not
unfrequently tormented with pains in the groins, weight and
dragging m the testicles, irritation in the rectum, tenesmus,
with retention or incontinence of urine. These depend chiefly
upon the localization of the primitive disease, and are easily
explained by the anatomical relations of the urethra. Fever
of an inflammatory or intermittent character is sometimes pre-
sent, and affections of the joints, which have been described
by some authors under the title of gonorrhoeal rheumatism.
Varieties. 94. Gonorrhoea is not always confined to the organs of ge-
neration, or their dependencies; hence varieties in its^eat,
owing either to the sympathies of other parts during the pre-
sence of an urethral gonorrhoea, or from the direct application,
from accident or carelessness, of the matter to a healthy mu-
cous surface. These varieties in the seat of gonorrhoea have
chiefly been observed in the eye, the nose, and the rectum.
Conse- 95. The more acute forms of gonorrhoea may terminate in
anTternii- resolution, or chronic discharges simply, a mere supersecretion,
nations, without ulceration or breach of surface ; to ascertain this, how-
ever, when a discharge continues indefinitely, without being
materially influenced by remedies, the canal of the urethra in
the male, or the vagina in the female, should be carefully
examined. The other more ordinary terminations of go-
norrhoea are ulcerations of the urethra, stricture, and diseased
conditions of the bladder, prostate, or testicles.
Differen- g6. Gonorrhoea can hardly be confounded with any disease
nosis!^ exce pt a primary venereal sore situated in the urethra. From
this it is to be distinguished by the character of the discharge,
which, in the latter instance, is serous, sanious, or bloody, and
less in quantity than in the former, and by the presence of
a circumscribed induration in some part of the urethra. The
lips of the urethra may be everted, and when a sore exists in



GONORRHOEA.



45



this situation it can occasionally be seen. In many instances,
however, the ulcer is further down the passage, and then the
latter mode of examination fails.

97. In order to understand clearly the principles upon First stage

which the treatment of a specific gonorrhoea is to be conducted, of s Pe«fic

, .7 or ordinary

it will be necessary to premise that this disease admits of a gonorrhoea.

division into three stages, to each of which a distinct treatment
is applicable ; and it is owing perhaps to prescribing for the
first stage what is only suited to the second, or to the second
what should have been employed in the first, that the disease
is so often and so long protracted. The first stage of gonor-
rhoea, or that of incubation, is characterized by the absence of
acute inflammation ; there is slight pain or heat in micturition,
pufliness and redness of the lips of the meatus urinarius, which
are sometimes everted and sometimes stuck so fast together
by an adhesive muco-pus that we have some difliculty in sepa-
rating them ; there is also a slight muco-purulent discharge,
and a flattening in the stream of urine. This is the first stage
of gonorrhoea ; and when these symptoms occur wholly or in
part from four to ten days after a suspicious intercourse, we
may be pretty sure a gonorrhoea has been contracted, and, if
not cut short, will run on quickly to the second or inflamma-
tory stage. It is to the first stage only that the abortive treat-
ment about to be spoken of is limited.

98. The treatment calculated to cut short a gonorrhoea in Under
its first stage should not, as a general rule, be resorted to after what cir -
forty-eight hours from the first invasion of the disease, and is STatT
then not in all cases successful. Yet when the protracted tive treat -
character of discharges of this kind is considered, their fre- Sd be
quent, various, numerous, and even dangerous complications employed,
and sometimes their disastrous consequences, we cannot but

do right to recommend this treatment when the patient applies
in proper time, and there is nothing to contra-indicate its
employ. An additional reason that this treatment, under such
circumstances, should be employed, is the constitution of
certain patients ; the scrofulous, the rheumatic, the gouty, and.



46



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



those troubled with chronic diseases of the skin always suffer
much from gonorrhoea ; and if the disease once becomes esta-
blished in the system, it is very difficult to cure.
Treatment 99. The treatment to arrest the first stage of gonorrhoea
stage. 6 &St consists either ™ tne employment of the balsam of copaiba in
large and frequently repeated doses, or the use of strong in-
jections of the nitrate of silver. When it is determined to
employ the latter method alone, or combined with the former,
the urethra must be injected by means of a glass syringe, as
frequently as the patient can bear it, during twenty-four hours,
witb a solution of the nitrate of silver, in the proportion of
two grains to the ounce of water. The injection must tben be
left off to see its effect. Very frequently this treatment at
once cures the patient, and no second stage sets in ; under
other circumstances it may hasten the onset of the second
stage.

Symptoms 100. The first stage of gonorrhoea speedily passes into the

of the se- se cond, in which the inflammatory symptoms are more marked,
cond and , .. , m . . , '

third an£ i the discharge altered m character. The penis is red and

stages. swollen, the urethra feeling like a cord when rolled between
the fingers, micturition is frequent, and attended with severe
pain, and the patient is tormented with frequent and involun-
tary erections of the penis. Under some circumstances, if
the inflammation run high, severe symptomatic fever may be
present. In the third stage all these symptoms have subsided,
and there only remains slight discharge with varied patholo-
gical conditions of the urethra.

101. It is of immense importance, from reasons already
adduced, that gonorrhoea should be prevented, or cut short in
its commencement, since its duration, in many instances, is
almost indefinite, and its consequences so serious. Patients,
in a state of alarm after a suspected connexion, frequently
seek the advice of their surgeon with the following symptoms :
slight irritation in the urethra, dragging of the penis and tes-
ticles, uneasiness in voiding the urine, with redness and tume-
faction of the hps of the meatus, and a slight increase in the



GONORRHOEA.



47



natural secretion of the mucous membrane of the urethra itself.
These symptoms do not indicate that a gonorrhoea has been
contracted, since an excessive excitement of the organs of ge-
neration, without infection, might produce them ; but in the
positive absence of any means of a differential diagnosis be-
tween this and the commencement of actual gonorrhoea, it
behoves the patient to be careful. Some are of opinion that
many gonorrhoeas might be avoided, and the symptoms cut
short on the onset, if the patients did not commit errors or
excesses in diet at this period, and continue to expose them-
selves to all kinds of excitement. This opinion is deserving
of the more attention, since we commonly see a discharge
from the urethra set up and continue for some days after a
debauch, and then of itself subside. 1 When the symptoms
we have indicated make their appearance, the patient should
strictly adopt and adhere to the lowest possible diet, repose as
much as possible in the recumbent position, and take smart
aperients with diluent drinks. The warm bath must be
avoided; this, of itself, under such circumstances, has fre-
quently produced the disease ; the cold bath, in warm weather,
may be used.

102. A true gonorrhoea may be either acute in its com-
mencement, or ushered in with symptoms so mild, and appa-
rently so trivial, as to be termed chronic ; the disease also
may assume a variety of shades of intensity, varying between
these two extremes. Against the first form a pure antiphlo-
gistic treatment should be adopted. Bleeding from the arm,
from the vena dorsalis penis, aperients, low diet, with local
bleeding, by means of leeches, from the perineum, with the
warm bath, and complete repose of the organs affected, con-
stitute the remedies especially applicable to the stages of acute
gonorrhoea. Little medicine is here requisite beside small
doses of the nitrate of potash, administered in a copious

' The researches of M. Lombard, of Geneva, prove that the excessive
use of malt liquors, wines, &c, tends to produce discharges from the
urethra, and inflammation of its lining membrane.



48



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



draught of barley-tea. 1 The gonorrhoeal discharge may be
ushered in with symptoms less acute than those just described;
and under these circumstances general bleeding may be unne-
cessary, although, if the patient be plethoric and of full habit,
general or local depletion in the commencement will most
materially facilitate our chance of a speedy cure. 2 Again, in
that form of gonorrhoea which is chronic from the commence-
ment, it will be well at first to examine carefully the urethra,
and if we find a part which is indurated, hot, and painful on
pressure, to apply a few leeches over it. 3 It is merely neces-
sary to state that local bleeding, employed for these purposes,
is not to be resorted to for the removal of discharge merely ;
nor without the symptoms of inflammation on some point of
the urethra are evident. If employed when the membrane is
lax, and no inflammation is present, where the disease is merely
a gonorrhoea and not an urethritis, we shall prolong the affec-
tion instead of cutting it short.

103. An antiphlogistic treatment, although calculated to
facilitate the action of other remedies in the cure of gonor-
rhoea, is not calculated of itself, at least but rarely, to accom-
plish this object. Hence another plan of treatment has been

1 Be. Sodae carbonat. gr. xx.

Sodas potass.-tart. jj. M.
Bis terve die sumend. ex aqua tepida ; or added to half a bottle
of soda water. — Carmichael.

2 " Negliger de pratiquer la saignee dans ce cas, e'est laisser echapper
Tune des indications les plus pressantes." (Desruelles, p. 421.)

3 To illustrate by a case the use of topical bleeding from a point of the
urethra, in that form of gonorrhoea which is termed chronic : A gentleman
consulted me, who had been the subject of a slight discharge from the
urethra for five months ; he had frequent desire to void his urine, with a
constant and troublesome tenesmus ; he had tried remedies of all kinds,
and injections, during this period, with partial benefit and occasional
injury. On examining his urethra, which had not been before done, I
discovered tenderness, with thickening of the urethra, in the perineum.
Four leeches were applied with great benefit, and by their repetition at
intervals, three or four times, he lost his pain, his tenesmus, and the dis-
charge.



GONORRHOEA.



49



framed, which is termed " revulsive." This consists in the
employment of remedies which are supposed, hy producing a
specific action of their own on the lining membrane of the
urethra, to supersede that of gonorrhoea : these remedies are
principally copaiba, cubebs, turpentine, the preparations of
iron, iodine, and cantharides, with injections. Every practi-
tioner must daily witness the uncertainty of the revulsive
treatment of gonorrhoea employed alone, and the change from
remedy to remedy, with but partial benefit to the patient. In
this uncertainty, many authors have endeavoured to lay down
certain rules at what period the revulsive treatment may be
resorted to with the most certain hope of realizing its full and
curative effects. " When the acute stage has ceased, although
the patient may yet continue to be troubled with erections,
and although the penis may be heavy and uneasy, and the
glans and Hps of the meatus still red and slightly swollen, I
have recourse to those remedies which are termed « par excel-
lence' anti-gonorrhceal, which, however, I abandon, to have
recourse again to antiphlogistics, if their employment occasion
the least increase of inflammation." 1 The use of specific re-
medies should be limited to the purulent stage of gonorrhoea,
when the more acute symptoms of inflammation have been
subdued.

104. "When," says Dr. Wallace, "an impression has been
made on the inflammatory symptoms, and that they cease to
advance or remain stationary, the urethra should be injected
every morning with a solution of the nitrate of silver, made in
the proportion of fifteen or twenty grains to the ounce of dis-
tilled water, and the patient should be placed under the com-
bined influence of mercury and the balsam of copaiba and
cubebs." 2

1 Ricord, pp. 725-6.

* Wallace p. 257. In this stage of the disease Dr. Wallace administers

turn 2* r pm> with a grain ° f ° pium ^ ■ « w«-

hend the benefit saxd to be derived from the practice is due to the opLm
and not to the mercury, as we do not recognize the principles on which it
*™ t0 * revent bub0 «d secondary symptoms." We are likewise

3



50



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



105. "We are not to conclude from what has been said, that
in all instances general and local bleeding are to be employed
in gonorrhoea before we have recourse to those remedies that
are more particularly termed specific. Thus, in scrofulous
and weak subjects, or those previously troubled with nocturnal
emissions, the inflammation may be of so passive a character
that it will be proper to have recourse at once to the revulsive
treatment, with injections. In all cases, however, as I have
before said, a careful examination of the state of the urethra
and the constitution of the patient should be instituted.
of specific ^' :ie C0 P aiDa balsam is one of the most common re-

remedies, meclies used in the revulsive treatment of gonorrhoea, and that
Copaiba u P on w hich most dependence is to be placed. It may be em-
ployed early in the disease, unless the inflammation of the
urethra be very acute ; it is then only to be used when the
symptoms are in some measure mitigated by general and local
bleeding, &c. If the disease be subacute, it may be adminis-
tered during the period that local bleeding from the perineum,
&c. is practised. In the chronic forms of the complaint it
may at once be employed. Eicord remarks, that it is only
against the urethral form of gonorrhoea that copaiba is effica-
cious ; he believes it possesses little or no influence over the
vaginal or uterine varieties, &c. Both this author and Des-
ruelles think it is much more effectual given alone than in a
state of combination with other remedies, and recommend it
to be given, as the most pleasant way and least likely to dis-
turb the stomach, on the surface of a glass of white wine or
lemonade. Dr. Wallace, on the contrary, believes its effects
are more marked in a state of combination, at least that the
combination is more beneficial than the balsam taken singly. 1

of opinion that the nitrate of silver should he employed in the first instance
in this stage, in the proportion of a quarter of a grain of the salt to the
ounce only.

' R. Bals. copaibse.

Pulv. cubebse, aa jj.
Liq. potassze, 5ij.
Pulv. acacite, Jss.
Aqiue rosae, 5VJ. M.



GONORRHOEA.



51



This author combines it with cubebs, or alternates one remedy
with the other. It may be given by way of enema when the
stomach will not bear it, but, when so employed, the dose
must be much larger than when given by the mouth. The
copaiba has likewise been administered with success in large
doses at the very onset of gonorrhoea, however acute, and
without any preparatory treatment. Monteggia and Fuller
administer from half an ounce to an ounce of the balsam for
a dose night and morning, at all periods of the disease. 1
M. Delpech succeeded in curing four hundred cases by adminis-
tering two drachms and upwards for a dose three times a day;
if the inflammation was acute, general bleeding preceded its
employ. 2 Rossignol was successful in three hundred cases of
gonorrhoeas of all kinds. He employed large doses of the me-
dicine uncombined, and did not submit his patients to any
preparatory treatment, or any dietetic regimen. 3 The average
duration of treatment in these cases was eight days. The
method we have just described must be employed with caution ;
and in most cases where the patient is plethoric, it would be
well to accompany or precede it with a general bleeding. We
think it might be then employed with pretty general success
in cutting quickly short a gonorrhoea, when a patient applies
immediately after having contracted it. M. Lallemand, in re-
peating the experiments of M. Ribes, 4 concludes, that although
the large doses of copaiba succeed sometimes in cutting short an
acute gonorrhoea, they sometimes augment the inflammatory
symptoms and the discharge. I have seen one or two patients
in which an incurable incontinence of urine has been brought
on by large doses of copaiba.

107. The balsam of copaiba may be administered alone in

' Bulletin de la Socidte Medicale d'Emulation, 1822.
3 Revue Medicale, t. vii, p. 403.
3 Dictionnaire de Merat et Delens.

* Memoire sur l'emploi de baume de copahu a haute dose dans la
gonorrhee et l'engorgement consecutif du testicule. Loc. cit. et Revue
Medicale, t. ix. M. Ribes gives from two drachms to an ounce of the
balsam for a dose, to cut short a gonorrhoea in the commencement.



52



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



■wine or lemonade, as I have said, and this is the best way
when it is used in the commencement of the disease. It may
also be given in various forms of combination.

108. The essential oil of copaiba, the resin of copaiba, the
balsam inclosed in capsules, the alkaline solution, and a soluble
extract prepared by Morson, have been employed with tbe view
of getting rid of the unpleasant smell and taste of the balsam :
these remedies, however, are none of tbem entitled to the
same confidence as the latter remedy. 1

1 Particular forms for the administration of Copaiba.

MIXTURES.

R. Balsam, copaibae, §j.

Mucilaginis gummi acaciae, 5ij.

Vini Xerici, giv. M. (Val de Grace.)

A fourth part twice a day, or more frequently.

R. Balsam, copaibae, ad ^ij-
Aquae, Jiv.
Vitelli ovi, No. 1.

Liq. opii sedativ. m x ad xx. M. (Cullerier.)
The quarter part, or more, night and morning.

R. Balsam, copaiba?.

Syrup, tolutanos.

Mucilaginis gummi acaciae, aa Jj.

Aquas rosae, Jiij.

Sp. aetheris nitric. 3iij.
The quarter to the half, night and morning.

R. Aquas menthae pip.
Sp. vini rect.
Balsam, copaibae.
Aquae aurantii, aa Jij.

Sp. aetheris nit. 3j. M. (Chopart.)

Two large spoonfuls, three times a day.

R. Kesinae copaibae.
Sp. vini rect.
Syrup, bals. tolutan.
Aquae menthae pip.
Aquae aurantii, aa ^ij-

Sp. aetheris nit. 3ij. M. (Chopart.)

Three or four large spoonfuls, night and morning.



GONORKHCEA.



53



109. The piper cubebse is employed in the revulsive treat- piper
merit of gonorrhoea, after the same manner as the copaiba. c«beba\



R. Sapo. Hispaniolae, gij.

Balsam, copaibas, jj.

Pulv. glycyrrhizse, q. s. ft. pil. 120.
Dose. — From 15 to 40 a day, at intervals.

R. Ext. catechu, Jss.
Bals. copaibas, 5iij.
Terebinthinae chiae, Jj.*
Sanguinis draconis, ^ss. M.
To be made into pills or boluses of ten grains, from ten to thirty of
which are to be taken daily, at intervals.

R. Ext. catechu.

Bals. copaibas, aa, 3iij.
Hyd. chlorid. 9j.

Pulv. glycyrrhizae, q. s. ft. pil. 150.
Dose. — Twelve a day, at intervals.
"When employed as an enema, the dose of the balsam should be from
half an ounce to an ounce.f

INJECTIONS.

R. Bals. copaibas.

Vitelli ovi, aa, ^ss.
Infus. rosae, 5xv. M.

R. Bals. copaibas, §j.
Sacchar. alb. Jj.
Sp. vini, 3vj.
Aquae destillat. ;$xiv.
Ext. opii, gr. vj.

Mix the balsam with the sugar, then add the alcohol and the water gra-
dually ; pass the injection through a funnel with a view of extracting those
portions of the balsam which may not be dissolved. This injection is em-
ployed at Val de Grace, in chronic gonorrhoea, complicated with cystitis.

* I have substituted the chia turpentine for the colophane, or powdered
yellow resin, of the original prescription. — L. P.

t See Velpeau, Recherches et Observations sur l'Emploi du Baume de
Copahu, et du Poivre Cubebe, administer par l'anus contre la blennor-
rhagie. Archives generales de Medecine, t. xiii, p. 45



54



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



It may be administered in moderately large doses on the onset
of an acute affection, with a view of at once cutting it short ;
when employed, however, under these circumstances, the same
rules must be observed as those we laid down for the adminis-
tration of copaiba. The cubebs may also be given in chronic
gonorrhoea, and in gleet, separately, combined with copaiba,
or united with some preparation of iron. It may also be
employed in form of enema. 1

1 Particular Forms for the exhibition of Cubebs.

MIXTURE OF THE CUBEBS AND COPAIBA.

R. Bals. copaibae, ^ss.
Pulv. pip. cubebae, ^j.
VM Xerici, ^iij.

Aquae rosae, aurantii, vel menthas, |v.
Pulv. acaciae, q. s. ft. mist.
Employed with great success at Val de Grace, in acute or chronic
urethritis.

ELECTUARY OF CUBEBS.

R. Pulv. pip. cubebae.
Sanguinis draconis.
Pulv. ratanhiae.
Ext. catechu, aa. 5ij.
Bals. copaibas, q. s. ft. elect.
Dose. From two to four drachms in the twenty-four hours, in chronic
gonorrhoea, or gleet.

FILLS OF CUBEBS AND COPAIBA.

R. Pulv. pip. cubebae recentis, Jj.
Balsam, copaibae, Jss.
Vitelli ovi, q. s.

To be made into pills of five grains each. Dose. From six to sixty a
day, at intervals.

R Pulv. pip. cubebae, Jss.
Balsam, copaibae, 5ij.
Fern sulphatis, 3j.

Resinas flavae, v. terebinthin. chias, jiij. M.
To be made into boluses of ten grains each. Dose. From fifteen to



GONORRHCEA.



55



110. Many other remedies may be resorted to in the pro-
tracted forms of chronic gonorrhoea : these are chiefly the remec e
preparations of iron; chalybeate waters ; iodine, particularly
in its combination with iron, so successfully employed by



thirty a day, at intervals. In chronic gonorrhoea, or gleet, in lax consti-
tutions.

R. Pulv. pip. cubebse, 5j, ad jij.

Ferri carbonat. 3ss, ad 5j. M. ft. pulv.

This mode of exhibiting cubebs combined with the carbonate of iron
is much and successfully employed after the acute symptoms of a gonorrhoea
have subsided. One powder should be taken three times a day.

SYRUP OF CUBEBINE.

Of the hydro-alcoholic extract of cubebs, 5xij.
Simple syrup and mucilage, Oj. M.

One ounce of this syrup contains a little more than two drachms of the
powdered cubebs. Its dose can be regulated from this knowledge of its
strength.

Cubebs and eopaibse may be advantageously given with the Inf. pareira;
bravae, or Inf. diosmse crenatse in gleets and gonorrhoea complicated with
affections of the bladder and prostate.



LOZENGES OF CUBEBINE.

Cubebiue, 8 parts.

Mucilage of gum tragacanth, 1 part.
Liquorice powder, q. s.

To be made into lozenges, each containing six grains of cubebine.



THE OLEO-RESINOUS EXTRACT OF CUBEBS.

Obtained by distilling the cubeb pepper with water, and separating the
volatile oil thus formed ; treating the residue with alcohol ; drawing the
latter off by distillation, evaporating to the consistence of syrup, and then
mixing with the volatile oil obtained by the first process. This remedy is
more active and certain than the powder of cubebs, and much pleasanter
to take.



JU SYPHILITIC DISEASES.

Ricord, Richard, and Henry s » lead,* cantharides, and tur-
pentined In all instances, however, of chronic discharges
from the urethra, this canal should be carefully examined, to
determine, if possible, the pathological conditions which keep
up or are associated with the discharge; without this we must
be at a loss for correct indications, we must prescribe at hazard,
and our patient's disease maybe prolonged indefinitely. It is"
often of great service to employ small local bleedings from the
perineum at the time we are using astringent or tonic injec-
tions, or the remedies alluded to in the present chapter.

ST °fn me o" • 111,1 W bittert0 said noth ing about the use of mercury
norrhiiT" in g onorrh cea, because I do not believe in the specific effect of
mercury over purely gonorrhoea! diseases. Dr. Wallace em-
ployed it constantly in gonorrhoea till the system was brought
slightly under its influence, with the view " of preventing
bubo and secondary symptoms." I believe this opinion to
have originated, as I have before stated, in a false notion of
the pathology and nature of this disease. Whilst, however,
I deprecate the use of mercury as a specific remedy in go-

1 R. Ferri iodidi, gr. ij, ad v, or more.
Pulv. opii, gr. i.
Mucilaginis, q. s. ft. pil.
Ter die sumend.

3 R. Plumbi acetatis, 9j.

Bals. copaiba;, 3j.

Pulv. glycyrrhizae, q. s. ft. pil. xxiv.
Dose. One pill to eight. Employed with advantage by
Desruelles in chronic gonorrhoea.

3 R. Terebinthinae chise.

Sanguinis draconis, aa. 5ij.

Olei terebinth, q. s. ft. pil. xxx.
Dose. Prom three to six or more in the day.



R. Guaiaci resinae pulv.

Terebinthinae chiae, aa 5j. M. ft. pil. xxiv.
Capt. iii. v. iv. bis terve die. In gleet, or chronic gonorrhoea.



GONORRHOEA.



57



norrhcea, I think it a remedy of great utility in the latter
stages of this affection, exhibited with a view of removing
those morbid changes in the urethra which long-continued
chronic inflammation has occasioned. With this object it
may be advantageously employed in the manner laid down by
Dr. Wallace. "When," says this author, " gleet or chronic
gonorrhoea is connected with an indurated state of the
urethra, &c., it will be prudent to submit the patient to a
short course of mercury, partly because the indurated and
narrowed state of the urethra often depends on the specific
effects of the venereal poison, and partly because, even when
this is not the case, an alterative course of mercury frequently
offers the best remedy. Indeed I have, on many occasions,
experienced much pleasure from observing not only the gleety
discharge, but also the contracted and indurated state of the
urethra to disappear, as soon as the patient's constitution was
brought under the specific influence of mercury." 1 Dr. Wallace
recommends, as exceedingly efficacious, a combination of ca-
lomel with antimony and opium. 2

112. Many surgeons object to the use of injections in Use of
gonoi-rhcea, fearing that they frequently occasion stricture, J ectlon
and other morbid conditions of the urethra. I am however
of opinion, that a long-continued irritation or inflammation of
the urethra is much more likely to give rise to these evils, and
hence it is of consequence to cure a gonorrhoea by the means
which will accomplish this object most quickly, at the same
time they do it safely. It is true that injections require great
caution in their use, and their injudicious employment is fre-
quently followed by serious consequences, but, in these in-

1 Op. cit. p. 285.

s R. Hyd. chlorid. gr. j ad iij.
Pulv. antimon. gr. iij ad v.
Pulv. opii, gr. ss. M.
Conf. aromat. q. s. ft. pil.
Nocte maneque sumend.
If the disease occur in a gouty or rheumatic constitution, colchicum
may he substituted for the antimony in the above prescription.

3§



58



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



stances, the blame rests with the surgeon, and not with the
remedy. Injections should generally be used twice or three
times in the day, and the fluid injected should be made to re-
main in the urethra a minute or two before it is discharged.

In the acute forms of gonorrhoea, injections are inadmissible;
they should be employed as soon as this stage is passed, and
in cases chronic or indolent from the commencement, they
may at once be used.

To cut short a gonorrhoea at once, when a patient applies
before the acute stage has commenced, Ricord prefers injec-
tions of the nitrate of silver, which he employs of the strength
of two grains to eight ounces of distilled water, 1 gradually in-
creasing the strength as long as no irritation is produced.
When the acute stage has passed, this surgeon generally em-
ploys the acetate of lead 2 for a few days, but has recourse
again to the nitrate of silver in stronger solution, if the lead
does not quickly succeed. Dr. Wallace recommends the ni-
trate of silver in the proportion of fifteen grains to the ounce
of water ; Desruelles, a scruple to the pint ; and likewise a
pomade to smear over bougies, and then passed into the
urethra. 3 Dr. Wallace employs the nitrate of silver as long

1 R. Argent, nit. gr. ij.

Aqua? destillatse, jviij. M. ft. injectio.

2 R. Plumbi acetatis, 9ij.

Aquae rosaj, Jvj. M.

This strength is for the male urethra ; if used as an injection in vaginal
gonorrhoea, &c. the quantity of the acetate of lead may be increased as far
as an ounce to the pint of water.

3 R. Argent, nitratis, 9j.

Aquae destillatse, Oj. M.
As an injection in chronic urethritis.

R. Adipis, 3j.

Argent, nitratis, gr. iv. M.

Of use in the same affection, smeared upon a bougie, and thus passed
into the urethra.

Injections should never be used sufficiently strong to cause severe pain in
the urethra; mucilage and camphor are advantageously added to prevent this-



GONORRHOEA.



59



as any morbid sensibility exists in the urethra ; when this has
ceased, and the discharge still continues, he has recourse to
solutions of the bichloride of mercury, the acetate of zinc, or
the sulphate of copper j the chloride of zinc has also been
lately very successfully employed. 1

113. A vast variety of injections are employed in the va-
rious forms of chronic gonorrhoea, those which I have already
indicated are most generally used and successful. "When the
disease has become perfectly atonic, and all morbid sensibility
has disappeared, or when the patient is merely teased with a
drop or two of mucous discharge oozing from the urethra
once or twice in the day, injections of wine are used exten-
sively both by Ricord and Desruelles, and with much success,
alone, or combined with tannin. 2 The infusion of galls 3 with

1 R. Hydrarg. bichlorid. gr. iv.

Aquae dest. Jviij. (Wallace.)

R. Zinci acetatis, gr. xij.
Aquas, viij. M.

R. Cupri sulpliatis, gr. xij.
Aquae, jviij. M.

R. Zinci chloridi, gr. viij.
Aquae, ^vii]. M.
The strength gradually increased.

2 R. Aquae rosae, jiv.

Villi rubri, Jij. M.

The quantity of wine gradually increased, till at length it may be em-
ployed pure. Desruelles adds a sixth or an eighth part of brandy.

R. Vini rubri, jvj.

Tannin, gr. xviij. M.

For the male urethra ; for the vagina, the quantity of tannin may be
doubled, or still further increased. I have found this injection very
valuable.

3 R. Gallae, 5j, ad 5ij.

Aluminis sulph. 9ij.

Aquae ferventis, Jviij. M. ft. injectio.



60



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



alum is also useful, and lately M. Ricord has employed with
great success the iodide of iron. 1 In weak solutions the
iodide of iron has frequently arrested the gonorrheal dis-
charge in four or five days, in other instances it has brought
on an acute attack of urethritis ; but in these instances, when
the inflammation has subsided, the patient has been cured of
his gonorrhoea. In these instances, the average duration of
the treatment has not been more than seven or eight days ;
in a third series of cases the patients have been unable to bear
the irritation which injections of the iodide of iron occasioned,
and consequently its employ was given up.

114. It will often be found of great service to vary the
character of the injection, when one appears, from continued
use, to have lost its effect : we shall also find that some pa-
tients bear one kind of injection better than others ; hence I
have found persons much benefited by port wine and tannin,
who could not bear the weakest solution of the nitrate of
silver.

115. Ricord, Fricke of Hamburg, and Desruelles, agree in
opinion, that gonorrhoea is kept up commonly from the con-
tact of the two sides of the urethra; and hence it was proposed
by Fricke to introduce, by means of an elastic gum catheter
or bougie, a fine piece of lint into the urethra, and let it re-
main there, removing it only at each period of making water ;
the lint may be employed dry, or soaked in any astringent
injection. The practice has been foUowed by occasional
success. 2

116. Sometimes all our remedies are unsuccessful in check-
ing the discharge ; it then becomes necessary to examine care-
fully the urethra, to discover upon what pathologic condition

1 Be Ferri iodidi, gr. iij.

Aquae dest. ^vj. M.

The quantity of the iodide may he gradually increased. Its employ
requires caution and watchfulness.

5 See Ricord, op. cit. p. 745, and in the Gazette des Hopitaux; also
Desruelles, op. cit., and Fricke, Lettres au Dr. Desruelles, &c.



GONORRHOEA.



CI



the continuance of this depends. In cases of morbid sensibility
of one portion of the canal only, the solid nitrate of silver
may be directly applied to it, by means of the "port caustic"
of Lallemand, or any other convenient instrument. When
most other means have failed, and a running still continues,
with uneasiness, or morbid sensibility in the urethra generally,
or in several parts, Eicord considers it advantageous to pass
the solid nitrate of silver over the whole affected surface of
the urethra. Chronic urethral discharges which have conti-
nued for a long period lose their local character, and become
constitutional diseases. I have succeeded frequently in curing
them by the mercurial vapour bath and general remedies, when
all specific treatments had failed.



62



CHAPTER VI.

OF DISEASES WHICH COMPLICATE OB, SUCCEED TO GONORRHOEA

IN THE MALE.

117. The diseases which complicate, and succeed to go-
norrhoea in the male, are exceedingly varied and numerous,
and very frequently of much more consequence than the ori-
ginal affection, to which, however, they are in most instances
strictly due. The following are those which I have most com-
monly observed and treated.
Alteration 1 18. Occasionally, when a patient has suffered from go-
in the na- norrhcea, and when tbe more prominent features of the disease

til 1*3.1 clclS

ticityofthe ^ aYe altogether subsided, tbe patient, after micturition, finds
urethra. that he has not completely emptied the urethra, although he
fancied that he had done so ; the water comes away in drops,
or in a stream, for some minutes or even longer, wetting the
linen, and rendering him extremely uncomfortable. This I
attribute to an alteration in tbe natural elasticity of tbe urethra,
for on examination no stricture is to be found. Tbe proper
remedy is the bougie ; one of large size should be introduced
three times a week, and suffered to remain in the urethra for
an hour, if no irritation be produced.
Stricture. H9« Strictures in the urethra are almost always the con-
sequence of protracted gonorrhoeal inflammation, seated in one
or more points of the urethra, which, ultimately extending to
the subjacent tissues, occasions thickening, induration, or ve-
getation. These are the diseases which, in the expression of
Desruelles, an imprudent youth bequeaths to adult age, and



GONOBRHCEA IN THE MALE.



63



which, in certain instances, at more advanced periods, render
the patient's life miserable. In the advanced stages of chronic
gonorrhoea, recourse should be always had to the bougie,
which should occasionally be passed, with a view of preventing
constriction or thickening of the passage, and promoting the
absorption of any submucous deposit, or effusion, that may
have taken place.

120. When a gonorrhoea is seated in the deeper parts of Abscesses
the urethra, in the membranous or prostatic portions, the ^t^f™ g
rectum is sometimes sympathetically affected, and the patient anus,
very often suffers from severe pain in the fundament, and a

very troublesome tenesmus. This sympathetic irritation is
carried in some cases so far, particularly if the patient have
used much exercise during the course of his disease, that in-
flammation is set up in the subcutaneous cellular tissue sur-
rounding the anus, and abscesses form. If circumscribed
swelling, with heat and tenderness in the vicinity of the anus,
come on during the course of gonorrhoea, the parts should be
freely leeched, and the patient subjected to the recumbent po-
sition, and perfect quietude. Supposing these means have
little or no influence over the circumscribed induration, and
the presence of matter be suspected, this should at once be
discharged by a very free incision ; if a puncture instead of
an incision be made, the matter in all probability will not get
free vent, may burrow up by the side of the rectum, and a true
" fistula in ano" may ultimately ensue. I have seen two or
three instances in which such a result has taken place.

121. Although gonorrhoea is not followed (except in rare Gonorrhce-
instances, and even these are matters of doubt,) by secondary a } rheuma-
symptoms, properly so called, it appears to dispose the tlSm "
economy, either from sympathy, metastasis, or other causes,

to several diseases of a very important nature. One of these
diseases is gonorrhoeal rheumatism, which makes its appearance
under two forms ; the first seated in the joints, and resembling
very much synovitis from other causes ; the second confined
more to the muscles and aponeuroses, and affecting the fleshy
parts, such as the shoulders or hips. In some instances these



64



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



diseases are owing to a sudden suppression of the gonorrhoeal
discharge, whilst in others they bear a strict relation to the con-
dition of the local disease, the rheumatic symptoms yielding
as the discharge lessens, and returning with increased force,
when, from any circumstances, the gonorrhoea becomes worse.
When these forms of rheumatism complicate gonorrhoea, or
appear to be produced by it, the gonorrhoea itself is generally
very troublesome to cure. The treatment will depend altogether
upon the form under which the rheumatism is manifested.
If synovitis be present, it may be necessary to leech the affected
joints, whilst the patient takes, in combination with the or-
dinary specific remedies, colchicum, camphor, or opium. 1 If
the disease be owing to a sudden suppression of the discharge,
it has been recommended to bring it back by introducing a
bougie, smeared with gonorrhoeal matter, into the urethra.
The warm, but more particularly the vapour-bath, is an
important adjunct to any internal treatment that may be
adopted.

Gonorrhoe- 122. Pure gonorrhoeal ophthalmia makes its appearance
of the ey^ unc ^ er three forms : 1st, It may arise from the direct applica-
Gonorrhce- ^ on gonorrhoeal matter to the eye ; 2dly, From metastasis ;
al ophthal- and, 3dly, It has been supposed to be due to sympathetic ir-
ritation merely, without either the direct application of gonor-
Its three •
forms. rhceal matter, or from metastasis. Some writers have denied

that the direct application of gonorrhoeal matter to the eye of
the same individual has power to produce the first form of the
disease, and this was the opinion of Dr. Vetch. Numerous
cases, however, establishing the fact that gonorrhoeal matter
produces the most destructive form of inflammation of the eye,
have fallen under my own notice, and under that of all modern
surgeons who have written on the disease. In the second form
of the disease the eye is supposed to suffer from metastasis ;



1 R. Ext. colchici acetic, gr. j ad gr. iij.

Camphorse, gr. iij.

Pulv. opii, gr. ss.
Ft. pil. ter die sumenda.



GONORRHOEA IN THE MALE.



65



analogous to those successive attacks of different parts which
are observed in gout or rheumatism. 1 That this form of oph-
thalmia is not caused, like the preceding, by the direct contact
of matter from without, is demonstrated by the fact that it
has been observed to occur more than once in the same indi-
vidual, although every means had been most carefully employed
to protect the eyes from contamination. 2

123. Mr. Lawrence thinks "as much blood should be Treatment
taken from the arm as will flow from the vein, and that the °l gonor-
evacuation should be repeated as soon as the state of the cir- fl am mation
culation will allow us to get more." (p. 36.) Blood must also of the e y e -
be taken from the temples by cupping, and by the free appli-
cation of leeches round the part, until the pain and vascular
congestion is relieved. Mr. Wardrop goes so far as to say
that the only case of gonorrhoea! ophthalmia he had seen, in
which the eye was saved, was that of a young woman, in whom
venesection was repeated as often as blood could be got from
the arm. Bleeding alone, however, must not be depended on,
but at the very commencement of the disease local applications
of an astringent character, hereafter to be mentioned, must be
combined with it. Notwithstanding these authorities, " it is
stated that the gonorrheal discharge is suppressed, and that
the inflammation of the eye occurs in consequence of that
suppression." This view is supported by Richter, Scarpa,
and Beer, and they consider the restoration of the discharge
from the urethra as a principal indication in the treatment.
I have never seen a well-marked case of this kind, though
there are many on record. I have seen the most acute oph-
thalmia associated with profuse discharge from the urethra,
and this was very marked in a case I attended with my friend
Dr. Melson. Swediaur has collected a few cases, in which the
return of discharge from the urethra cured an ophthalmia
which had arisen from its sudden suppression, and which had

' Lawrence on the Venereal Diseases of the Eye, p. 34.
8 Wallace, op. cit.



(it;



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



resisted the usual modes of treatment. The third form of
gonorrhceal inflammation of the eye is that which occurs
during the continuance of a clap, without the direct applica-
tion of the matter, or without the suppression of the discharge.
" Since, then, gonorrhceal ophthalmia may occur whilst the
discharge from the urethra continues, and since it does not
take place when that discharge is stopped, we cannot admit
that the affection of the eye owes its origin to the cessation of
disease in the urethra."

124. We are disposed to think that Weeding has been too
exclusively relied upon in this disease, which is, in its com-
mencement, purely local ; and Mr. Lawrence himself is dis-
satisfied with the results of the cases treated exclusively on
this plan, although he attributes its want of success to its not
having been employed to a sufficient extent. However, he
mentions a case (Case 5,) in which blood was taken very
largely, both locally and generally, and other powerful anti-
phlogistic means were resorted to, yet the eye was lost.
Mackenzie says, " bleeding alone must not be depended on
and O'Halloran is of opinion that if an inquiry were instituted
amongst army surgeons, it would be found that those who had
used the greatest depletion were the least successful prac-
titioners.

Local re- 125. Directly after the system has been depressed by loss
gonorrhoe- °^ D ^ 00 ^' we must have recourse to local, astringent, or specific
alophthal- remedies. Amongst these maybe mentioned, as entitled to
most confidence, the solution, or pomade of nitrate of silver.
The former may be employed in the proportion of ten grains
to the ounce of water, dropped into the eye at the very com-
mencement of the disease. O'Halloran "had become dissatisfied
with the antiphlogistic treatment, from having found it fre-
quently insufficient. I was hence led to use astringents, not
only in the early stage of the disease, but when the purulent
discharge and chemosis were fully established. He employed
the sulphate of copper in substance, rubbing with it the inner
surface of the eyelids after everting them, or he dropped



GONORRHOEA IN THE MALE.



67



into the eye the ten-grain solution of the nitrate of silver." 1
Mr. Lawrence mentions two cases where this treatment was
successful. Most modern authors are agreed upon this plan
of treatment, and use as astringents a solution of the nitrate
of silver, of the sulphate of copper, or a pomade of the first-
named salt. I have seen one case in which a solution of the
sidphate of copper was completely successful, when the nitrate
of silver in the same form appeared to do little good. In the
intervals of the dressings the eye is to he covered with a com-
press soaked in the Liquor aluminis compositus diluted. The
extract of belladonna may be rubbed over the temples, and
round the orbit, during the treatment, with a view of prevent-
ing any adhesions of the iris, which commonly becomes affected,
as well as the other deeper seated structures of the eye. If
the chemosis be great, Eicord recommends a portion of it to
be removed with a pair of scissors, a practice of which Dr.
Mackenzie speaks also in very high terms.

126. It is perfectly useless, not to say criminal, in such Specific

cases, to waste the time, so precious to our patient, in ad- ajiti-gonor-
... i \ .„ . rhoeal re-

mmistermg the remedies looked upon as specific in gonorrhoea, me dies use-
such as copaiba and cubebs, recommended by Dr. Wallace. less -
" The anti-gonorrhceal remedies, properly so called, have
absolutely no action upon the disease, whatever be their mode
of administration." Tbe testimony of modern experience is Mercury of
against the use of mercury in the acute forms of this disease ; little use -
we lose time, and compromise the vision of the patient, by
relying upon it in this stage ; in the chronic forms it may be
employed with a reasonable prospect of success.

127. Those authors who support the view of gonorrhceal Restoration
ophthalmia being produced by metastasis, place great stress ^ r ^ e
upon the restoration of the urethral discharge ; it is also re- charge,
commended in cases where this ceases during an attack of

disease of this character. Swediaur, Richter, Beer, and Scarpa
recommend the introduction of a bougie smeared with the dis-
charge from the eye, or with gonorrhceal matter taken from



1 Lawrence, p. 44.



C8



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



another patient. In spite of the authorities of these names, I
think their advice rather the result of preconceived theoretical
notions than the deductions from the results of treatment.
Mr. Lawrence supports the latter opinion, and the modern
writers of greatest experience agree with him. "If," says
Bicord, " the discharge from the urethra is for a short time
diminished during an attack of gonorrhceal ophthalmia, it is
never completely suppressed, and we can affirm, in spite of
contrary opinions, that not the least benefit is to be expected
from attempting to increase or restore it." (p. 763.) Swediaur
appears to have been successful in some chronic cases of this
character by the restoration of the urethral discharge ; but I
cannot find in any late writer, neither have I ever seen a case
supporting the efficacy of this treatment.
aHritis 1106 " "^ an y m °dern surgeons admit a true gonorrhceal in-

flammation of the iris. This generally occurs in scrofulous
patients labouring under gonorrhoea or gleet. Sometimes it
succeeds to gonorrhceal inflammation of the conjunctiva or the
sclerotic, or occurs with that peculiar species of rheumatism
which sometimes accompanies a gonorrhoea. It very commonly
alternates with affections of the joints, and an acute attack of
synovitis frequently cures or very much relieves the inflamma-
tion of the eyes. The frequency with which this species of
disease succeeds to mdd gonorrhceal ophthalmia, and the
facility with which adhesious of the iris take place renders it
necessary that iD the various forms of gonorrhceal ophthalmia
we should adopt the plan of keeping the pupil dilated by the
external application of belladonna. " This affection of the
eye is exactly the same as rheumatic inflammation of the scle-
rotic and iris occurring independently of gonorrhoea. Both
this and the mild purulent inflammation of the conjunctiva are
to be regarded as rheumatic affections of the organ excited by
gonorrhoea, that is, they take place in individuals in whom this
constitutional disposition is shown by inflammation affecting
either the synovial membranes or the fibrous structures of
several joints." 1 Dr. Vetch has given cases of this disease.

1 Lawrence, p. 57.



GONORRHEA IN THE MALE. 69

In one instance the gonorrhoea was well marked and violent,
and was succeeded by a swelled testicle ; rheumatic inflamma-
tion of the joints and of the external proper tunic of the eye
followed. They terminated in an irregular and contracted
pupil, some opacity of the capsule of the lens, adhesions be-
tween it and the iris, and a considerable loss of vision. Gene-
rally, however, the prognosis is favorable, and the disease
very much more under the control of art than the more acute
forms of purulent ophthalmia. " The gonorrhceal is generally
more rapid in its progress than any of the other varieties of
iritis, and is one of the most severe and formidable whilst it
lasts ; but it yields more promptly to decided treatment than
any of the rest, and affords examples of perfect recovery even
when the aqueous chambers are filled with lymph." 1

129. The treatment must consist, in the onset, of general Treatment
and local bleeding, suited to the urgency of the symptoms ; iritis
calomel and opium, so as rapidly to affect the system, and the
application of the extract of belladonna. Our chief reliance is

to be placed upon mercury united with opium and antimony ;
and if there exist a rheumatic state of the system, colchicum
and turpentine will be useful. Sir B. Brodie places great re-
liance on colchicum. As local applications, warm decoctions
of poppy are generally agreeable to the patient's feelings on
account of the great pain that sometimes attends the disease.
" When the inflammation is checked, blisters may be advanta-
geously employed, and the cure may be completed by Plum-
mer's pill, with mild aperients and regulated diet."

130. The most frequent of all the diseases of the testicle Inflamma-
which accompanies or succeeds to gonorrhoea, is inflammation epididymis
of the epididymis, epididymitis. This occurs so constantly

and regularly as a consequence of gonorrhoea, that M. Ricord
applies to it the name of "epididymite blennorrhagique."
This disease is commonly described under the terms of orchitis,
hernia humoralis, or swelled testicle : the dissections of Ricord
and others prove that these names are misapplied, and the



1 Mackenzie, p. 476.



70



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



How and
at what
period it
occurs.



Causes.



Not caused
by injec-
tion, or
suppres-
sion of
discharge.



Differen-
tial diagno-



disease is generally confined to the convolutions of the epidi-
dymis.

131. This disease hardly ever occurs during the first, 1 or
even in the second week of a gonorrhoea, more commonly in
the third. Ricord believes the disease may originate in two
ways, from sympathy and from the direct propagation of in-
flammation from tie ejaculatory ducts to the vesiculse semi-
nales, through the vas deferens to the epididymis ; his dissec-
tions have proved this. Cullerier also believes that it is owing
to tbe direct propagation of disease along the seminal passages,
and not to metastasis. The longer the continuance of a go-
norrhoea, the more likely is it to be thus complicated ; the
best way to prevent it is to cure the disease as quickly as pos-
sible. Amongst other causes are exercise, constipation, the
neglect of the suspender, free living, and the use of stimuli
during the course of a gonorrhoea. Amongst the predisposing
causes of this affection may be enumerated fatigue, violent
exercise, repeated sexual intercourse, and any circumstance
producing excitement of the organs of generation. Various
occupations predispose to it, as those of weavers, turners,
grooms, and all trades where the testes are exposed to frequent
friction. "A flaccid state of the scrotum is also to be ranked
amongst the predisposing causes : a strong cremaster and firm
scrotum are rarely met with in individuals suffering from swelled
testicle."

132. A swelled testicle is not caused, in ordinary cases, by
the use of injections, or the quick suppression of the dis-
charge, but by the extension of the inflammation in the manner
already named. The tables of M. Gaussail show that the
swelled testicle is much more frequent in the fourth and fifth
weeks of the disease ; hence the quicker the primary affection
is cured, the less chance there is of consecutive inflammation
of the epididymis and affections of the testicles.

133. It is not improbable that in certain positions of the
testes, and where an irreducible scrotal hernia is present, a



1 Not once in three hundred times. (Ricord.)



GONORRHOEA IN THE MALE.



71



swelled testicle may be mistaken for a strangulated hernia.
I attended a gentleman for gonorrhoea who had an irreducible Case
scrotal hernia of the right side. In the third week of the dis-
ease, after a long walk, he became affected with swelled tes-
ticle on the ruptured side ; this was accompanied by constipa-
tion, vomiting, tenderness of the abdomen, and other symptoms
common to strangulation of the bowel ; for two days the case
had a very formidable aspect. Mr. Acton 1 has recorded a
curious and instructive case bearing upon this subject. "A Case
young man, twenty-four years of age, was in the habit of
amusing himself, when a boy, by pushing his testicles into the
abdomen. Two months previous to his admission into the
hospital he contracted a gonorrhoea which discharged pro-
fusely ; he continued, notwithstanding, his employment. In
about a fortnight after, he felt a painful sensation in the left
groin ; and this becoming worse, he entered the hospital a
month after the commencement of his complaint, suffering
under great pain in the inguinal region, which was greatly in-
flamed, wlnlst pressure on that part produced that peculiar
feeling, but in a greater degree, which is excited when the
testicle itself is compressed. On examining this patient, no
testis was found on the left side of the scrotum, but, on passing
the finger into the left inguinal canal, a rounded body was
distinctly felt, resembling the testis in shape, and the patient
stated that he experienced a similar pain to that felt when the
testicle on the opposite side was squeezed."

This case was recognized as one of ordinary swelled testicle,
notwithstanding the unnatural position of the organ. It is
not improbable that such a case might be mistaken for a stran-
gulated inguinal hernia, more particularly when such symp-
toms as vomiting, constipation, and tenderness of the abdomen
are present. The history of the concomitant affection, and
the absence of the testes in the scrotum, are the chief points
which could decide the surgeon. Should such a case coexist
with a strangulated hernia, it would form a curious and puz-



1 On Venereal Diseases, p. 95.



72



SYPIITLITIC DISEASES.



zling complication, and one which would render the operation
extremely embarrassing.

134. If gonorrhceal epididymitis occur with any degree of
intensity, the disease soon involves the neighbouring tissues of
the testicle ; and hence we observe speedily succeeding to it,
or complicating it, diseases of the tunica vaginalis, or testicle
itself, and very commonly inflammatory hydrocele, oedema,
erysipelas, or phlegmon of the scrotum.

135. This disease is prevented by the antiphlogistic treatment
of gonorrhoea, the use of the suspender, and the early employ-
ment of specific anti-gonorrhceal remedies, as copaiba, cubebs,
&c. "When once set up we must employ general bleeding, if
circumstances require it, or local bleeding from the region of
the spermatic chord, or perineum ; the patient must keep the
testicle suspended, and remain in the horizontal position. To
relieve the pain, which is sometimes very acute, frictions upon
the testicle with oil, opium, or belladonna, &c, may be em-
ployed. 1 When the acute symptoms have in some measure
subsided, the most efficacious practice is compression of the
testicle, strapping it with plaster of mercury, and ammo-
niacum. 2 This practice generally succeeds in curing most

1 R. Olei camphorati, Jj.

Tinct. opii, 5j. M. ft. liniment.

or,

R. Adipis, 5j.

Ext. opii, 5ij. M.

or

R. Adipis.

Ext. Belladonna?, aa Jj. M.

s The emplastrum " de "Vigo," is generally employed for this purpose
in the French Venereal Hospitals ; it resembles much, though is in some
points superior to, the Emp. ammoniaci cum hydrargyro of the London
Pharmacopoeia. The form is as follows :

R. Hydrargyri, 95 parts.

Styracis liquidae, 48 parts.



GONORRHOEA IN THE MALE.



73



forms of epididymitis in five or six days, and has the advantage
of not confining the patient. I have repeatedly employed
it from the very commencement of the disease with the most
complete success.

136. The Emplastrum ammoniaci c. hyd., ortheEmp. "de
Vigo" are to he cut into thin straps, and applied in a circular
manner round the testicle, drawing this organ, as far as can
be done without pain, to the bottom of the scrotum, and taking
care not to pucker the skin in applying the plaster. The first
strap is placed circularly round the testicle at the insertion of
the cord, compressing the organ as much as the patient can
bear ; a succession of straps are then applied till the organ is
covered : and a second series of straps then placed over the
circular ones from below upwards, and over these again a few
more circular ones to keep the whole in place. If the pressure
of the plaster occasions pain or irritation, the straps are to be
removed till the inflammation or sensibility is more diminished;
in many instances the patients experience relief directly the
testicle is supported by the plaster.

137. During the local treatment of the disease, the patient
is to persevere in the use of specific anti-gonorrhoeal remedies ;
the copaiba and cubebs ; and a mild mercurial course may be

These are to be rubbed together till the globules of mercury disappear ;
then melt together, in a separate metal pot, —

Emp. plumbi, 312 parts.

Cerse flavse, 16 „

Terebinthinse purse, 16 ,,

Picis Burgund., 16 „

Gum. ammoniaci, 10 „

Olibani, 5 I(

Myrrhae, 5 „

Croci in pulv. 3 „

These ingredients are to be well mixed, first amongst themselves, and
then with the mercury and styrax. The plaster thus made is to be spread
upon linen, calico, or thin leather, and then cut into strips of convenient
thickness.



4



74



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



recommended, to remove any thickening or enlargement which
remains after the more acute symptoms of epididymitis and
its complications have subsided. 1
Chronic 138. A chronic enlargement of the testis, sometimes occur-
menUif a ^ one ' an( ^ sometimes complicated with hydrocele, occa-

the testis, sionally remains after the subsidence of the more acute symp-
toms accompanying a swelled testicle. For this affection
compression is of little use. I believe the proper remedy to
be the hydriodate of potass, with alterative doses of mercury,
and the external application of the tincture of iodine. Mer-
cury pushed to salivation is occasionally of great service in
these consecutive diseases of the testicle and its envelopes.
General 139. In some constitutions gonorrhoea leaves behind it a

weakness general weakness and irritability of the organs of generation,

jiiicl lnritft™ • • •

bilitv of " an< ^ an alt era tion in the character of these secretions. The

the genital semen is scanty and devoid of its characteristic smell ; it is
systems'" 7 an< ^ watei 7> ejected languidly during coition ; very
quickly, and without sensation. When the bowels are evacu-
ated, there is occasionally forced from the urethra a thin sub-
stance like gum, which has a soapy feeling when rubbed
between the fingers. This is no doubt a vitiated hyper-secre-
tion which hangs about the relaxed mucous membrane of the
urethra, the lacunae, and the ejaculatory ducts, and which
is forced from the urethra by the action of defecation. At the
same time the penis and scrotum are flaccid, and the reflex
actions of the erector and ejaculatory muscles are with diffi-
culty excited. With these symptoms there commonly exists
weakness and trembling of the legs, and a general lassitude
of the whole system.

The balsams and turpentines, with the preparations of steel,
kino, catechu, and cantharides, are very useful in such states

1 Kicord employs the following form of pill in these cases :

R. Hydrarg. chlorid. 9j.
Pulv. v. Ext. conii, 9ij.
Sapo. dur. 9ij. M. ft. pil. xxiv.



GONORRHOEA IN THE MALE.



75



as general remedies. Tonic and stimulating injections should
also be practised with a syringe perforated on the sides so as
to inject the lacunae of the urethra, which are commonly the
principal seats of disease. Friction of the loins, scrotum,
thighs, and penis with warm spirituous embrocations, should
be practised at the same time.



76



CHAPTER VII.

OF GONORRHOEA IN THE FEMALE.

Nature. 140. Gonorrhoea in the female is for the most part a dis-
ease of very different character to that in the male ; the ana-
tomical structure and functions of the organs implicated modi-
fying the affection both in its seat, its course, its treatment,
and its terminations.

Seat. 141. This disease recognizes for its pathology acute or
chronic inflammation of the vulva, vagina, uterus, or urethra ;
the inflammation itself being of a specific character, the result
of impm-e cohabitation, and capable of producing gonorrhoea
in the male. In the female, gonorrhoea is not confined to the
urethra ; it is commonly seated in the vagina, in the mucous
membrane reflected over the neck and mouth of the uterus,
or in the lacunae surrounding the meatus urinarius, so minutely
described by Dr. Graaf, who considered them the true seat
of the disease.

142. M. Gibert, whose experience and learning always com-
mand our attention and respect, gives the following view of
discharges in the female :

1st. Urethral gonorrhoea, the type and model of gonorrhoea
or blennorrhagia properly so called ; eminently contagious.

2d. Vaginal discharges, termed gonorrhceal or blennorrhagic,
much more common than the preceding, particularly in females
of loose character, the precise nature of which it is often very
difficult to determine ; nevertheless the vagina may be the seat
of a pure specific gonorrhoea, either alone or complicated with
urethral gonorrhoea.



GONORItHCEA IN THE FEMALE.



77



3d. Uterine gonorrhoea or blennorrhagia, capable of pro-
ducing a similar disease in the male. These discharges should
only he regarded as specific when they are associated with
ulceration of the os uteri. The uterine discharge continues
long after the other forms have been cured, and is contagious,
although it resembles mere leucorrhoea.

These ulcers must not, except in rare cases, be regarded as
syphilitic ; they are in most instances the result of ordinary
inflammation. Dr. Henry Bennet, who has favoured us with
by far the most practical and philosophical monograph extant
on "Ulcerations of the Os Uteri," 1 thus explains the nature
of the ulcerations which, in most instances, complicate the
various forms of gonorrhoea or blennorrhagia : " They are
nearly all, in my opinion, inflammatory. In vaginitis, be it
simple or virulent, the inflammation soon extends to the cervix
uteri, where, owing to the great vitality of the organ, to the
number of its mucous follicles, and to its exposed situation,
the inflammation easily passes on to ulceration." " Ulcerations
presenting the characters of the inflammatory ulceration are
excessively common on patients labouring under blennor-
rhagia," &c.

4th. The fourth form of discharge to which M. Gibert
alludes is that of the external parts, which he compares with
balanitis in the male. The diseases are, however, in many
points essentially different.

. 143. In the more acute forms of the disease, a strictly an- Treatment,
tiphlogistic treatment and regimen must be adopted : general
or local bleeding, aperients, the warm bath, emollient fomen-
tations and poultices, and injections or rather continual irri-
gations of the parts, by means of a self-acting syringe, with
sedative, demulcent, or slightly astringent fluids. When local
bleeding is thought necessary, the leeches should be applied
on the inside of the thighs or in the folds of the groin ; these
situations are preferable to the perineum or the labia. As it
must be uncertain whether the discharge is complicated with

1 A Practical History of Inflammation, Ulceration, and Induration of
the Neck of the Uterus. London, 1845 ; Churchill.



78 SYPHILITIC DISEASES.

ulcers, it is always well to keep the leech-bites free from the
contact of the discharge, to avoid the possibility of inoculation,
and thus the probable occurrence of venereal sores.
Use of the 144. In the earlier and more acute stages of the disease, it
speculum. is not pru dent, and sometimes not always safe, to have recourse
to the speculum to ascertain whether the gonorrhoea is com-
plicated with venereal ulcerations or not ; our first duty is to
subdue the acute inflammatory symptoms, and then if the
chronic stage be protracted, or do not yield to treatment, and
there is reason to suspect the existence of deep-seated ulcers,
the speculum may with propriety be used to clear up our
diagnosis.

145. Adopting the idea of Fricke, many surgeons believe
that gonorrhoea in the female, as well as in the male, is pro-
tracted by the contact of the two sides of the urethra or vagina,
&c. ; and hence, in the case of the female, M. Ricord recom-
The plug, mends the introduction of a soft plug of charpie, or lint, which
may be changed twice a day, and, during the intervals, kept
constantly moist with injections of any kind, suited to the
nature of the case, thrown over it with a syringe ; the plug
may likewise be dipped in these injections before it is intro-
duced. This remedy has the double advantage of separating
the two sides of the vagina, and thus preventing the irritation
their contact occasions, and of applying a direct topical medi-
cation to tbe parts affected — a circumstance of vast import-
ance where internal or general treatment is of comparatively
little value.

Internal 146. The internal treatment of gonorrhoea in the female is
very limited. The remedies which are considered specific in
this disease in the male, as copaiba, cubebs, &c, are here
almost inert. Then- action upon the vaginal forms of the
disease is very feeble, a little more energetic over the urethral
varieties. Aperients, with diluent and demulcent drinks, con-
stitute nearly the whole of our resources, under the head of
internal treatment. Mercury appears useless in the uncom-
plicated forms of the disease, except with a view of removing
any chronic enlargement or thickening which may be the result



GONORRHOEA IN THE FEMALE.



79



of long-continued chronic inflammation. The treatment is
then to be the same as that we recommended, when speaking
of the use of mercury in gonorrhoea in the male.

147. The local treatment of acute vaginitis or urethritis in J^jjJ^
the female consists in the topical abstraction of blood, if ne- r
cessary ; and during the more severe stages the use of emol-
lient and narcotic fomentations and injections, with or without

the use of the plug. This treatment, however, should not
be long continued, if ineffectual ; for we frequently find rest,
local bleeding, emollient and narcotic applications of little use,
the patient still continuing to suffer from severe pain, and an
abundant puriform discharge, whilst the mucous surfaces of
the vagina, &c, continue red, and turgid with blood. The
nitrate of silver may now be employed with the best effects,
either by passing the solid nitrate over the diseased surface,
or in form of injection, 1 keeping the vagina plugged with a
dry soft piece of lint in the intervals of the injections. When
the acute stage has in some measure given way, we may have
early recourse to astringent injections, with a view of prevent-
ing the discharge assuming the chronic form, and thus conti-
nuing for an indefinite period. The preparations of lead 2 or
alum 3 may be employed for this purpose.

148. When the more acute stages of disease are passed, and Treatment
the chronic form continues but little influenced by remedies, fl^™ mc
it will be well to examine the mucous surfaces of the vagina,

&c, by means of the speculum. These may be found in seve-
ral pathologic conditions ; simply red, turgid, and hypertro-
phied, or covered with red isolated patches, aphthae, vesicles,
pustules, or superficial ulcerations. After the continuance of
the disease for some time, the os uteri is always more or less
affected ; its hps are turgid, red, and everted, and generally

1 R. Argent, nit. gr. x.

Aquae, Jj. M. ft. injectio.

2 R. Aquae, Oij.

Plunibi acet. 5iij ad Jij. M. ft. injectio.

3 R. Aquae, Oij.

Aluminis sulph. 5iij ad 31). M. ft. injectio.



80



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



covered with small ulcerations, granulations, or other changes,
the result of chronic inflammation.

149. In the chronic forms of the disease, unattended by
change of structure, as local applications or injections we may-
employ solutions of tannin, 1 kino, 2 the infusion of roses with
bark, 3 alum or myrrh and catechu, 4 &c. &c. The solutions of
the chlorides of soda or lime are chiefly of use when the dis-
charges are offensive and accompanied by ulceration. 5 "When
the gonorrhceal discharge is secreted by the mucous surfaces
of the vagina, these applications may be thrown up with an
ordinary female syringe ; when, however, the os uteri or its
neighbourhood is the seat of the disease, it becomes abso-
lutely necessary to use the plug of lint, or a piece of sponge,
to keep the remedies in contact with the affected surfaces to
which they are wished to be applied.
Compli- 150. "When the chronic state of gonorrhoea in the female

CtltlOHS * •

is accompanied by any alterations of tissue, these changes
demand our first attention, since it is useless to attempt to
check the discharge as long as these conditions remain upon
which it depends. Ulcerations or papulous granulations should
be cauterized with the nitrate of silver, or, what is better, with



1 R. Tannin, 9ij ad 5j.

Vini rubri, Jvj. M.

2 R. Gum. kino, 5j ad 5ij.

Aluminis sulph. 9j ad 3ss.

Aquae ferventis, Oij. M. (Swediaur.)

3 R. Infus. rosse comp. Oij.

Pulv. cinchonas, Jij. M. (Hotel Dieu.)

4 R. Pulv. catechu.

P. myrrhae, 6a 5j-
Liquor, calcis, ~iv. M.

5 R. Solut. sodas, chlorid. pt. 1.

Aqua;, pts. 12 ad 16. M.

(Hopital des Veneriennes.)



GONORttHCGA IN THE FEMALE.



81



the acid nitrate of mercury.' This caustic is to be applied by
means of a camel-hair pencil, or a small roll of lint, to touch
the diseased surfaces, these having been previously cleansed
by dry lint or a soft sponge. When ulcerations themselves
have destroyed the tissues more or less deeply, caustics must
be employed with extreme caution. In these cases M. Ricord
covers the surface of the ulcers with calomel, upon which he
places some chy soft lint, and afterwards passes into the vagina
some lint soaked in one of the astringent or tonic injections
previously mentioned. Where the disease has extended more
or less into the uterus, and has assumed a form of disease
termed uterine gonorrhoea or catarrh, injections of the nitrate
of silver, in the proportion of six grains of the salt to the
ounce of water are preferable. 2

151. A true vaginal gonorrhoea may be confounded with Differen
acute or chronic vaginitis arising from other causes ; and hence n 'o]fe IES
arises a question of great delicacy and importance, whether
we are in possession of any facts which will enable us to esta-
blish a correct differential diagnosis between vaginitis as the
result of impure sexual intercourse and those forms of disease
which are the result of other causes ? " The diagnosis of leu-

1 To four parts of mercury, add, in a retort, eight parts of nitric acid ;
when the solution has taken place, reduce to nine parts hy evaporation.
This, the acid nitrate of mercury, is a solution of deutonitrate of mercury
in an excess of acid, and contains 71 per cent, of the deutonitrate. This
agent is a powerful caustic, giving rise to a white eschar, which does not
fall off for five or six days. (Dr. H. Bennet, Op. cit.)

The ahove solution may be applied also as an injection, diluted to suit
the feelings of the patient and the character of the disease. M. Ricord
has employed it diluted with twelve parts of water as an injection in ute-
rine gonorrhoea, &c. ; its use sometimes occasions pains and violent hyste-
rical symptoms attended with stupor. Owing to these circumstances,
M. R. generally prefers a solution of the nitrate of silver of the strength
above indicated.

2 For a full account of the best modes of applying escharotics and in-
jections to parts deeply seated, to the upper part of the vagina, or os uteri,
see the admirable directions given by Dr. Bennet in his work already
quoted.

4§



82



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



corrhcea," says Dr. Churchill, 1 " is, according to all authori-
ties, extremely difficult." Sir C. M. Clarke seems to think it
impossible.

152. In gonorrhoea the discharge is generally more frequent
and the inflammation more acute than in leucorrhcea. In the
former disease the glands of the groin are more frequently en-
larged, tender, and painful, and in gonorrhoea the affection
extends to the urethra in about two thirds of tbe cases. 2
Difficulties 153. Many causes contribute to render the treatment of

in treat- gonorrhoea in the female tedious and unsatisfactory, and a
ment avis- ° ,
ing from disease more difficult to cure in this sex than in the male.

various The recurrence of the menstrual period is constantly inter-
fering with the success of treatment ; and a gonorrhoea that
has been almost subdued in the interval, is renewed with all
its intensity at the time of menstruation. When gonorrhoea
is complicated with amenorrhcea or leucorrhcea, the case is
always rendered obstinate and embarrassing.

1 Outlines of the Principal Diseases of Females, &c. Dublin, 1838 ;
pp. 23-4.

2 See the paper of M. Ricord, Memoires de l'Academie Royale de
Medecine, 1833.



causes.



83



CHAPTER VIII.



OF THE SECOND CLASS OP PRIMARY SYPHILITIC DISEASES —
ULCERS, THEIR VARIETIES AND CONSEQUENCES.

154. There are three forms under which the primary vene- Forms of
real sore more commonly makes its appearance : in form of a ^ e V enereal
minute pustule or vesicle ; as a simple ulcer or chancre ; and ulcer.

as an ulcer succeeding to phlegmonous inflammation, which
has heen seated in a follicle, the cellular tissue or lymphatic
gland, vessel, or ganglion. It is also important here to remark
that the primary syphilitic idcer has two marked and distinct
stages : one of ulceration, the second of reparation or granu-
lation, each demanding a separate and distinct treatment both
locally and constitutionally.

155. All primary venereal ulcers do not present the same ciassifica-
aspect or character, and in this respect differ very materially tion of pri-
from each other. They resolve themselves naturally into a j^jPukers"
few principal forms. These are, 1st, The simple primary

ulcer, characterized by negative rather than positive charac-
ters — i. e. by the absence of induration, irritability, or inflam-
mation; 2d, the irritable; 3d, those characterized by an
excess of inflammation ; 4th, the indurated, — the induration
being a primary feature of the sore, and not being produced
by the injudicious use of local stimulating dressings, by which
any primary sore may be made to assume the indurated cha-
racter ; 5th, those spreading by rapid ulceration, or covered



84 SYPHILITIC DISEASES.

by sloughs of varied colour and appearance ; these varieties
being the ulcerative and sloughing phagedena of authors.

rfttSSSt 156 ' Venereal P ustule > tf presented to us sufficiently
stage? " earl y' and conveniently situated, should be removed by the
knife or scissors, or should the fears of the patient prevent
this, it is to be opened with the point of a lancet, and the
whole internal surface well cauterized with a crayon of the
nitrate of silver, and afterwards treated in the manner we
shall direct for the management of the primary venereal
ulcer.

157. "When we are called upon to treat the simple primary
venereal sore during its first stage, or that of ulceration, our
first object is to destroy the diseased surface and reduce it to
the condition of a simple sore. This is to be accomplished by
means of an appropriate escharotic, with which the whole sur-
face of the sore is to be well cauterized, taking care to avoid
any parts of the sore, if such there be, where the process of
granulation has already commenced.
Wallace's 158. "It is," says Dr. Wallace, 1 "during the ulcerating
• stage of primary syphilis, or when the process of granulation
has only partially commenced, that our assistance is for the
most part sought ; and when the disease is in this stage there
is no doubt on my mind of the propriety or practical utility
of immediately applying the nitrate of sdver in such a manner
as to destroy the diseased surface. I have treated, over and
over again, primary syphilitic ulcers with this caustic, and
without it, under circumstances as nearly similar as possible
in every respect, and the result has uniformly demonstrated
the very great advantages of the former over the latter mode
of proceeding. The nitrate of silver should be pointed before
using, and then rubbed carefully on every part of the ulcerat-
ing surface (previously cleared by poultices or emollient
fomentations of all incrustations), until the edge of the ulcer
be rendered black, and the surface of a deep ash colour. But
should any of the ulcerated surface have entered on the stage



1 Op. cit. pp. 92, 93.



ULCEUS.



85



of granulation, that portion is to be avoided, and the appli-
cation of the caustic confined, as much as possible, to such
parts of the sore as are still in the stage of ulceration."

159. Whilst the chancre continues in the state of ulcera- Dressings
tion, the application of the nitrate of silver must be repeated, after . tn ^
waiting for the separation of the eschar produced by the ^ the^' 0 '
caustic, to ascertain clearly the condition of the sore before caustic,
■we reapply the caustic. After the application of the nitrate

of silver, the idcer should be covered with a piece of fine soft
lint, spread with some simple ointment, 1 over which may be
placed a bread-poidtice, or fine linen moistened in the liquor
plumbi diacetatis dilutus, and the whole covered with a piece
of oiled sdk or isinglass plaster.

160. The local dressings to chancres, employed by M. Local ap-
Ricord at this period, deserve particular notice. They consist plications,
in the application of aromatic wine, 2 medicated either with
tannin, 3 with opium, 4 or with both.

1 One of the best applications as an ointment at this period is the opiate
cerate of the French Codex.

R. Adipis, Ibj.

Vini opii, jj. M.

A strong aqneous solution of opium may be used where ointments are
objected to, more particularly if the patient suffer much pain. Ricord
employs the following form :

R. Decoct, papaveris, v. conii. Jviij.
Ext. opii purificati, gr. viij. M.

s The aromatic wine of the French Codex, employed by M. Ricord in
the treatment of chancres, is composed of four ounces of aromatic herbs,
(rosemary, rue, sage, hyssop, lavender, absinthium, origanum, thyme,'
laurel leaves, the flower of the red rose, chamomile, mellilotum, and elder,)'
digested in two pints of red wine for eight days.

3 R. Vini aroniatici, Jviij.

Tannin, 9ij. M.

4 R. Vini aromatici, Jviij.

Tannin, 3ij.

Ext. opii pur. Jss. M.
These three preparations are extensively employed by M. Ricord in the



86



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



161. The sores are to be carefully washed with one or other
of these preparations, and afterwards covered with soft lint,
moistened in them. Care must be taken, in renewing the
dressings, to soften the lint well before it is removed, so that
no part of the surface or surrounding skin may be torn away
with the lint.

162. These preparations possess the advantages of modi-
fying the surface of the sore, of promoting its rapid cicatriza-
tion, of diminisbing the secretion of pus from its surface, and,
by their astringent properties acting upon the surrounding
tissues, of preventing the extension of the disease, or the for-
mation of fresh chancres, a circumstance so common in all
other modes of dressing. Tbe use of the aromatic wine with
or without tannin is contra -indicated when the surface of the
sore is dry, furnishing no secretion and remaining indolent,
or again where the edges being indurated these dressings
seem to increase the induration. In all otber circumstances
these are the local applications most commonly employed by
Ricord.

Constitu- 163. The state of the economy at large demands much at-

tional tention on the first appearance of a venereal ulcer : and we

treatment. ,

must here bear in mind the golden rule, that the varied ap-
pearances of primary venereal sores, and the characters they
afterwards assume, depend very much, if not altogether, upon
the natural constitution of the patient, and upon the particular
condition of his health at the time he imbibes the venereal
poison. Thus, in many instances, a primary venereal sore
upon the penis produces the most intense local inflammation
and fever. Under these circumstances the patient must be

local treatment of primary venereal sores on the genitals and elsewhere.
During the first few days he is satisfied with this local treatment ; the ap-
plication of the nitrate of silver, and a general antiphlogistic treatment if
necessary. Should no benefit result in five or six days, and the edges of
the ulcers become thick or hardened, without any disposition to heal, a
modified mercurial course is adopted. I am in the habit of using new
port wine, rendered aromatic or not, as the vehicle for the application of
tannin or opium.



ULCERS.



87



treated upon general principles : he should be bled generally
or locally, and the bowels kept freely open ; he should be re-
stricted to the simplest diet, and kept quiet in bed, whilst
emollient fomentations or poultices are applied to the sore.
The local inflammation and fever are first to be removed, in
these cases, before we think of resorting to the nitrate of
silver, and should the stage of ulceration be arrested by these
means, and the sore assume a disposition to heal, it will
not be necessary, or even safe, to use it at all, but the granu-
lating ulcer must be treated in the way we shall presently
mention.

164. Cullerier, in the treatment of the primary venereal
sore, confines his patients to bed, and keeps them upon low
diet; if there be any local inflammation or fever, he bleeds
them from the arm, and covers the sore with a poultice, the
opiate cerate, or a strong aqueous solution of opium. All
local inflammation and accompanying fever are to be subdued
before the use of the nitrate of silver ; and, during the two or
three days which are generally spent in its application, the
patient should live low, keep his bed if possible, and take
daily aperients, unless specially contra-indicated. This plan
has the twofold object of preventing or mitigating the inflam-
mation which may be caused by the application of the caustic,
and of preparing the patient for any subsequent general or
local treatment the nature of the sore may require. 1

165. During the earlier periods of the local treatment of Medication
chancre, a regimen suited to the constitution of the patient and diet '
should be observed. Under this point of view no exact rules

are to be laid down. In some cases a purely antiphlogistic
treatment becomes necessary, whilst in others, tonics and a

1 During those two or three days which are generally spent in the ap-
plication of the caustic, the patient should be prepared by a purgative, and
by regularity in his mode of living, for subsequent constitutional treatment ;
the lotio plumbi subacetatis may be applied without disturbing the dress-
ing, by immersing the diseased part in it two or three times a day, or by
rolling the penis in lint kept wet with this lotion, and covered with oiled
silk. (Wallace, op. cit. pp. 97-8.)



88



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



Mild

treatment
recom-
mended.



The au-
thor's
views on
the appli-
cation of
escharotics.



nourishing diet are required. The state of the general health
requires particular attention, for it must be recollected that,
from a bad constitution, or one enfeebled by previously existing
disease, result those complications and severe local affections,
so frequently observed during the progress of primary vene-
real sores.

166. Themoremildlyprimaryulcersaretreatedlocally, theless
likely are they to be followed by those appalling complications
which sometimes accompany them, such as rapid ulceration,
sloughing, or disorganization of the penis and scrotum, which
used to be so common under the old treatment of stimulating
mercurial applications during the first days of chancres. I
dwell upon this point because I deem it of the first importance,
whilst we have the universal testimony of modern writers on
Syphilis in its favour. To well understand the principles on
which the local as well as the general treatment of primary
sores must be conducted, the surgeon must constantly bear in
mind the two stages of chancre : in the first we have to do
with a specific sore, irritable, poisoned, and poisonous, liable
to be irritated by the least stimulus ; whilst in the second, we
have a simple ulcer destitute of all these characters.

167. A chancre, when first presented to the notice of the
surgeon, is generally in one of two states, either in that of a
small pustule with its contents yet undischarged, or a minute
ulcer. In whatever state it may be, our first duty is to en-
deavour, by the use of escharotics, to convert the specific sore
into a simple one. For this purpose most authors recommend
either a strong solution of the nitrate of sdver, or the applica-
tion of this caustic in substance.

"When the nitrate of silver is used, if the disease be pustular,
it will be necessary to open the pustule with the point of a
lancet, to discharge its contents, and rub the whole surface
and edges of the ulcer thus produced with the nitrate of sdver
previously cut to a sharp point ; if the disease be an open
ulcer it is to be treated in tbe same way. The nitrate of silver
thus applied will sometimes have the effect of producing a
simple sore, but it will more commonly give rise to consider-



ULCERS.



89



able irritation and inflammation, whilst the specific character
of the sore is not destroyed. I have seen so much evil, in
this respect, from the use of this escharotic, that I have now
abandoned its use under such circumstances, and have recourse
to other caustics of a more powerful character.

168. The great evil in the use of the nitrate of silver in Those
these cases is, that it is powerful enough to irritate but not tended
sufficiently powerful to destroy. We want a remedy that will
at once disorganize the tissue to a depth coequal with that of
the chancre. For this purpose I now employ several remedies :
highly concentrated nitric acid, the acid nitrate of mercury,
the acid nitrate of silver, or the potassa cum calce of the
London Pharmacopoeia. I have already given a form for the
preparation of the second of these remedies ; the third is made
by dissolving a drachm of the nitrate of silver in an ounce of
nitric acid. When it is determined to destroy a primary venereal
ulcer with any of the first three caustics, a camel-hair pencil
must be dipped in them, and the surface and edges of the sore
pencilled thickly over; if the acid be sufficiently concentrated,
the whole surfaces touched are at once destroyed, and con-
verted into a yellow eschar, which, on separating, generally
leaves a clean simple sore underneath.

169. When the potassa cum calce is employed, which is the How to be
most certain of all the remedies I have mentioned, it must be employed,
made into a paste of moderate consistency with spirits of wine, at
the time it is wanted for use, and the sore and its edges
covered with it. When it has been on a few seconds, a smart
burning pain is felt, which continues to increase as long as
the caustic is suffered to remain on, which it should be from
half a minute to a minute, or even longer, according to the
effects produced. After this the caustic must be all removed
by means of a fine bone spatula, and the black eschar left may
be covered with a poultice, a cold saturnine lotion, or fine
soft, dry lint. The pain soon subsides after the caustic has
been removed, and in about half an hour the patient is gene-
rally pretty comfortable. The aggregate amount of pain pro-
duced by the application of this remedy is not so great as that



90



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



by the nitrate of silver, whilst the effect of the potassa cum
calce is certain ; all the parts touched by it are at once de-
stroyed, and, on the separation of the eschar, we have a clean
granulating sore left, which commonly yields with great ra-
pidity, particularly if the ulcer be a recent one.
After- 1/0. Whenever, then, a primary venereal sore is presented
treatment. tQ ^ un j esa there be some special contra-indication in its
situation, &c, it should be immediately destroyed after the
manner laid down. If the sore be recent, i. e. of few days'
standing, it is very probable we may eradicate the disease at
once ; the constitution may not as yet have become infected.
In other instances it will become a matter of consideration
whether any constitutional treatment, and what kind, should
be adopted during the healing of the sore produced by the
caustic. A poultice is the most convenient and best applica-
tion during the time the eschar is separating, if the patient
can rest, which should always be urged upon him as an essen-
tial point, if it can possibly be managed. The moment the
eschar begins to be detached, and a secreting surface is ex-
posed, the poultice must be done away with and other reme-
dies employed. Of these, weak lotions are the best. I em-
ploy weak solutions of the nitrate of silver, acetate or sulphate
of copper, alum, or zinc, or tannin in port wine, in the pro-
portion of about two drachms of the former to six ounces of
the latter.

When the 171, There are certain conditions of primary venereal
use of es- ulcers which contra-indicate the use of the caustic in the first
charotics ^g^g^ if an u l C er of this kind produce violent inflamma-
mdicaS". tion of the penis, this must be reduced by a proper general
treatment before we have recourse to these remedies, which
may be used after the inflammation has been subdued, if the
sore be foul and stationary, and show no disposition to heal.
The situation of a primary venereal sore frequently altogether
prevents the use of the remedies in question ; for instance,
chancre situated under the prepuce, and producing complete
or partial phymosis. In such cases there is generally more or
less inflammation or tumefaction of the penis, more or less



ULCERS.



91



discharge from the preputial opening, and a distinct hardness
can be felt, tender to the touch. This hardness may be lesser
or greater according to the size of the concealed sore ; I have
felt it extending from the prepuce, under the skin of the
penis, down nearly to the pubes. It is almost useless, in such
cases as these, to attempt the reduction of the inflammation of
the penis by the ordinary means, which would succeed, were
the surface of the sore exposed and not so situated. It must
be borne in mind that the situation of the sore produces and
keeps up the inflammation, and the phymosis which is de-
pendent upon it. If the inflammatory symptoms in such a
case run very high, general bleeding, aperients, rest, fomenta-
tions, and low diet, may be employed as preliminary measures,
and we may succeed in subduing the inflammation more or
less completely by these means. "We must not, however, con-
ceive that we have completely succeeded, unless we can reduce
the phymosis, and expose the sore to view, the grand object
towards which all our treatment should be directed.

1/2. These measures, then, in chancre, with inflammation Inflamma-
of the penis and phymosis, may, and perhaps must be, re- ^"ancf
sorted to in the first instance; but if, after a reasonable time phimosis,
spent in their employ, the inflammation and tumefaction of
the penis do not give way, and we cannot denude the glans,
recourse must be had to the operation for the relief of the phy-
mosis, and the surface of the sore then exposed must be instantly
pencilled over with one of the liquid caustics before recom-
mended. By these means we shall prevent the inoculation of
the recently-cut surfaces. The parts should then be covered
with pledgets of lint soaked in port wine, rendered strongly
astringent by tannin, and the whole enveloped in a poultice.

173. All primary venereal ulcers are attended, in the com- Inflamma-
mencement, with more or less local inflammation, sometimes tionaccom-
of so violent a character as to produce pretty smart sympto- JK*
matic fever. Indeed, some of the most appalling results we venereal
witness, under circumstances of this kind, arise from the excess v * cea '
of local inflammation and the sloughing, rapid ulceration, or
gangrene which is its result.
I am convinced, from a very extensive experience in the



92



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



treatment of syphilitic diseases, that many of the ill effects
produced by primary sores are attributable to the want of a
proper regimen on the part of the patient, and, perhaps, also
to a want of sufficient directions on this point on the part of
the surgeon.

Whenever we are consulted by a patient with a primary ve-
nereal ulcer, particularly if it is tbe first from which he bas ever
suffered, it will become necessary to point out to him in as
strong terms as possible, the necessity of bis adhering rigidly
to a very abstemious diet till the ulcer assumes a granulating
condition ; it is well, also, at this period, to administer re-
peatedly, for some few days, aperient medicine, and to insist
on a total abstinence from malt liquor, wine, or spirits. If
the patient, from circumstances, cannot lie by and rest alto-
gether, press upon bim the advantage of retiring early to bed,
rest in bed being a most important auxiliary in the treat-
ment of all forms of primary syphdis. It is very easy to regu-
late all these matters in the hospital ; but iu private practice,
to which I am now more particularly referring, such means
cannot always be adopted ; and I am afraid their extreme im-
portance and advantage are not always stated in as strong a
manner as they should be to the patient.
Question of 1/4. Whether it be the intention to submit the patient ulti-
mercurial ma t e ly to mercurial treatment or not, these prehminary cautions
considered, should never be omitted. Many of the evds attendant on
mercurial courses are to be attributed to not preparing the
patient by diet, rest, and aperients, for the administration of
this medicine. I am far from subscribing to the tenets of
those who treat syphilis systematically on what is termed the
rational or simple plan without mercury : but I must bear so
far testimony in favour of this school to say that they have
conferred an immense advantage upon society by pointing out
that diet, rest, simple dressings, and an antiphlogistic regimen,
have a vast influence over the ravages produced by syphilis ;
and wherever mercury is exhibited for the cure of syphilis, more
particularly its primary forms, let the concomitant measures
relative to diet and regimen be these which the rational school
teaches, and I have just laid down.



ULCEUS.



93



If mercury be given for the cure of a primary venereal ulcer
it should not be used till the patient has been prepared to re-
ceive it by adopting, for some days, the regimen laid down,
and till all inflammation produced by the action of the escha-
rotics has subsided ; it may then be employed with every hope
of realizing its most beneficial effects. To throw it carelessly
in without these precautions, under a vague impression that
mercury is a specific for syphilis, is worse than injudicious; it
is criminal, and cannot be too much censured.

175. Plaving arrested the progress of ulceration in the pri- Mercury
mary venereal ulcer, and brought it to the condition of a gra- ™^™" d
nulating sore, a change in the plan of treatment becomes ^ 6 '
necessary, both constitutionally and locally. If mercury be
used, now is the time to have recourse to its employ with the
full hope of realizing its most beneficial effects. It is not
necessary here to enter into any disquisition as to the compa-
rative merits or results of the simple and mercurial plans
of treatment. The balance is immensely in favour of a
modified mercurial course, and, holding such an opinion, I
should be disposed, unless specially contra-indicated, always' to
recommend to my patient, at this period of his disease, a mild
mercurial treatment. > I refer the reader to the section on the

1 The reader may consult, if he thinks proper, the works of Wallace
Ricord, DesrueUes, and Cullerier, on the points here in question. He will
find all admitting the superior efficacy of mercury in hastening the cicatri-
zation of a primary venereal ulcer, and diminishing the risk of secondarv
symptoms. The last three-partisans of the simple treatment-recom-
mend mercury, when the sore is indolent, does not cicatrize under the
simple plan ; when its edges are hard and elevated, or the sore leaves be-
iund it, in healing, an indurated cicatrix.

Mercury, although not a specific against syphilis, is the most powerful
therapeutic agent we can employ, in many cases, in its cure. (Ricord ) I
am far from rejecting the internal use of mercury in the treatment of the
primary venereal ulcer. I believe that in many cases it is necessary, and
even indispensable. (See Cullerier, op. cit. p. 186; and the remSs of
DesrueUes, op. cit. pp. 313-5.)

Lugol believes that the simple or rational treatment of syphilis without
mercury favours the development of scrofula in a future generation (See
his work translated by Dr. Ranking.,) {



94



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



"Mercurial Treatment of Syphilitic Diseases," for rules to
regulate him in the exhibition of mercury ; and to the section
on "Particular Preparations of Mercury, &c." for forms for
its employment.

Local treat- 176. The local treatment of the sore must also be changed
mentofthe wne n the granulating process has commenced; and as mer-
stage of curial applications are generally injurious during the ulcerating
chancre. stage of chancre, so are they beneficial during the stage of re-
paration. Dr. Wallace employs, as local applications during
this stage, calomel and lime-water, mercurial ointment, the
ung. hydrargyri nitratis, the bichloride in lime-water, or in
distilled water: these applications being enumerated in the
order of their stimulating properties. The aromatic wine,
with or without tannin, will be useful if the sore secrete much
pus ; if the surface of the sore be dry and foul, great benefit
will be found by alternating the dressings with the wine, and
some detergent ointment. 1
Local ap- 177. The local applications must be varied to suit the actual
plications, condition and aspect of the sore : hence, should it be painful,
opium combined with the remedy we apply is useful. 2 Should
the irritability of the ulcers be of the inflammatory kind, it
will be necessary to leave off all stimulating dressings, and
have recourse to emollient fomentations, and the simple or
opiate cerate. Cullerier employs as topical applications, when
the inflammatory symptoms have subsided, solutions of the
nitrate of silver, sulphate of copper, mercurial ointment, or
pomades of calomel and opium or mercurial ointment and
opium. 3 All these varied preparations may be found useful in

1 R. Resinse flavse.

Gum. elemi.
Cerse flavse, aa ^j.
01. olivae, gvj.

Olei terebinth. 3ij. M. ft. unguent.

2 R. Cerat. opiat.

Hyd. chlorid. 9ij. M.

3 R. Cerat. opiat.

Ung. hyd. fort, aa Jj. M.



ULCEUS.



95



various conditions of the surface of the primary venereal ulcer.
The condition of the latter is the only circumstance that can
guide us in their proper mode of application.

178. Dr. Wallace thinks topical mercurial preparations of Topical
great value in the treatment of primary venereal sores, m tne application
second stage, and believes that, in some measure they supersede in the se-^
the necessity of an internal mercurial treatment. " In dis- o° n ehan gf e<
pensary practice, and among the lower ranks of society, the
internal administration of mercury, particularly at inclement
seasons of the year, can seldom with safety be recommended.

In such persons, and under such circumstances, topical applica-
tions are of infinite value. In cases of this kind I generally con-
fine my treatment to them, in conjunction with the internal use
of nitrous acid, and, by these means, succeed for the most part
in healing the disease with rapidity. Cases treated in this
way are also very rarely followed by secondary symptoms. 1

179. The indurated primary ulcer demands a treatment, The indu-

both local and general, in some measure different from the rated P ri "

rm ■ ■ f -i mary ulcer,

ordinary forms of disease. This requires a full mercurial

course till the sore has healed without induration of the cica-
trix. It must be recollected I limit the expression "indurated"
to an ulcer that is so from the commencement of the disease,
and do not apply it to those sores which have become indurated
from the repeated application of stimulating dressings. Local
treatment is not generally so efficacious in ameliorating the
condition of this as the other varieties of primary syphilis ;
the sore is not commonly much benefited except through the
medium of the constitution. Dr. Wallace gives some good
diagnostic marks by which we are enabled to distinguish
between the induration which is the natural attendant upon
this species of ulcer, and that which is produced in ordinary
simple sores by the injudicious application of remedies : " We
may always distinguish by the history of the case and by the
character of the areola, the indurated ulcerations which are
connected with irritation or inflammation. Thus, if indu-



1 Wallace, p. 113.



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



rated primary syphilis be not attended by tbese morbid states,
it will not be surrounded by an inflamed, but by a callous or
livid white areola, with or without a whitish Hue at the very
edge or margin of the ulcerated surface; or else the skin
surrounding the ulcer will present its natural appearance."
(pp. 310-11.)

hiduration 18 °' is one ^P* 0111 succeeding to primary ulcers

of the which sometimes occasions considerable anxiety to the patient
cicatrix. and annoyance to his surgeon; this is, "induration of the
cicatrix." After the healing of a primary sore the cicatrix
occasionally remains hard and elevated, and is prone to ul-
cerate on the occurrence of the slightest exciting causes.
This local condition denotes the persistence of syphilitic ac-
tion on the system, and is the "forerunner of accidents to
come." A patient in this condition may daily look for se-
condary local ulcerations of a rapid and destructive character,
and constitutional symptoms of the most formidable kind.
It, therefore, behoves him to adopt speedy means for the re-
moval of the induration, which may be generally accom-
plished, and till that period arrives he cannot be considered
safe.

It has been proposed to destroy the induration with caustic
or excise it with the knife ; both these methods are objec-
tionable, and founded on ignorance of the nature of the local
affection, which is to be looked upon as a symptom of con-
stitutional taint, and not as a local disease. Dr. Wallace's
advice on this head is judicious : " My conduct on this point
of practice is to persevere with the use of mercury, provided
it agree with the system, for at least ten days or a fortnight
after the induration may have ceased to diminish."

I could detad a number of cases of induration of this cha-
racter which I have entirely succeeded in removing by the
following treatment. The patient should have his diet re-
gulated, and be prepared for the use of the mercurial vapour-
bath, which should be employed three times a week ; at the
same time, he should rub in every night a drachm of mercurial
ointment till the mouth becomes sore, which should be kept



ULCERS.



97



so till the induration is gone; with this the hydriodate of
potass should be taken in five-grain doses twice a day. Few
recent indurations will resist a perseverance in this plan of
treatment. If perfectly chronic, and of long standing, the
case may he more obstinate.



6



98



CHAPTER IX.

OF CHANCRES OF THE URETHRA.

History of 182. Cases of syphilitic ulcers in the urethra have been
the disease. cursor jiy alluded to by many surgical writers. Hunter men-
tioned them, but certainly had no clear idea of their true
character and effects ; they are also noticed by Mr. R.
Carmichael in his clinical lectures on Venereal Diseases. The
late Dr. Wallace spoke of some discharges from the urethra of
venereal origin, which were only curable by mercury, but it
has been left to modern surgical pathologists, amongst whom
must be particularly mentioned Monsieur Ricord, to demon-
strate that primary venereal sores, precisely resembling in
their nature and consequences sores situated externally, may
exist in the canal of the urethra itself, at variable points be-
tween the meatus urinarius and the bladder.

183. It is clear, both from the statement of English and
French writers, that discharges from the urethra are due
to more causes than one ; and hence it is that we find Dr.
Wallace saying, "that there occur cases of these discharges,
in which we find mercury to act in the most salutary manner;
and others again, in which the discharge will continue, and
be, after a time, followed by induration and bubo, and most
probably, by secondary symptoms, unless this medicine be
given." 1 When we consider the generally powerless effect of
mercury over pure gonorrhoea, we cannot but suppose that



i Op. cit. pp. 248-9.



CHANCRES OF THE URETHRA.



99



these remarks of Dr. Wallace must refer to chancres or ve-
nereal ulcerations of the urethra, which an imperfect diagnosis
has confounded with gonorrhoea.

184. These are heat, itching, or irritation in the urethra, Symptoms,
occurring after a suspicious connexion, unaccompanied by-
discharge ; pain or tenderness in a particular part of the ure-
thra when it is rolled between the fingers ; the presence of a
distinct induration at the point where the pain is complained
of ; pain also increased during micturition, and referred to the
same point. Discharge from the urethra occurs at various
and at irregular periods after the setting in of the first symp-
toms already described. It is very different from the discharge
of gonorrhoea; it may be sanious, bloody, or of a sloughy
character, and commonly does not flow unless the indurated
portion before described be pressed forcibly between the fingers.

A gentlemen consulted me for a disease in the urethra,
which had existed many months, and which he said consisted
at first in a small sore, visible when the lips of the meatus
were separated, This part had healed; but it was evident
that the ulcer had extended its ravages down the urethra,
since, on pressing an induration which existed behind the
glans between the fingers, there escaped from the urethra a
tenacious slough, precisely resembling that covering an indu-
rated or Hunterian chancre in its first or ulcerating stage.

185. The only disease for which chancre of the urethra can be Differential
mistaken is gonorrhoea. From this it is to be distinguished bythe dia S nosis -
history of the case, the character and quantity of the discharge,

the presence of a distinct circumscribed induration in some
part of the urethra, most commonly seated in or immediately
behind the glans penis. This circumscribed induration must
not be mistaken for that general induration of the corpus
spongiosum urethrae which accompanies acute gonorrhoea,
and results from an effusion of lymph, &c. into the cells of the
spongy body. This state in gonorrhoea is generally accom-
panied by chordee, a symptom absent in chancre of the urethra.

186. In cases where muco-purulent discharges from the



100



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



urethra continue to resist the usual methods of treatment we
may resort to the means of differential diagnosis, of testing
the character of the disease by inoculation. M. Ricord 1 has
established that tbe inoculation of the skin of the thigh, the
prepuce, or elsewhere, with the matter of pure gonorrhoea
produces no result, or at best a negative one. The same ino-
culation with matter from the uretbra, secreted by a chancre
in that part, gives a characteristic pustule, and subsequently
a chancre or sore of venereal aspect. In eighty-five cases of
urethral discharges, thus tested by M. Mairion, at the military
hospital of Louvain, four were found of true syphilitic cha-
racter, and produced chancres by inoculation, the remaining
eighty-one gave noresult — theywere cases of simple gonorrhoea.
Combiua- 1 87- In some rare cases I believe it possible that a primary ve-

tion with nerea i sore in the urethra and gonorrhoea may be contracted
gonorrhoea. . ° . J ,

by the same connexion. I will mention a case wbich seems to

Case. bear upon this point. A gentleman, fifty years of age, con-
tracted from a suspicious connexion a discharge from the ure-
thra, which had all the characters of ordinary gonorrhoea ; he
placed himself under the care of an eminent practitioner, and
took for a month the ordinary remedies, such as copaiba and
cubebs : with this treatment the discharge disappeared. At
this time a slight ulceration was perceptible round the meatus,
which seemed to come from within the urethra. This spread
rapidly, soon involving the whole under surface of the glans,
and the urethra for an inch and a half, which were entirely
destroyed by ulceration and sloughing. I was consulted on
this case, which was succeeded by extensive nodes, and a pus-
tular eruption, and what is very remarkable, the nodes were
the first constitutional symptoms which occurred, an exception
to the law which seems to regulate the appearance of consti-
tutional symptoms generally.

I believe the poisons of gonorrhoea and syphilis to be per-



i See the chapter on "Inoculation," and the cases of" chancres lanes,"
in Ricord's work, before referred to.



CHANCRES OF THE URETHRA.



101



fectly distinct, but yet there are cases occasionally presented
to our notice where both chancres and gonorrhoea exist at the
same time.

It is not uncommon to see patients with external sores and
a true gonovrhceal discharge from the urethra at the same time ;
neither, in the female, is it rare to see true primary venereal
sores in the vulva, vagina, or uterus, coexisting with purulent
discharge from the os uteri or urethra. In the male, however,
more particularly, these two primary forms of disease are not
curable by the same remedies. In the case I have just quoted,
it appeared that the two forms of primary venereal infection
existed simultaneously in the urethra at the commencement,
since the symptoms of gonorrhoea disappeared under the use
of the ordinary specific remedies ; whilst the venereal ulcers
continued to spread, and ultimately produced the most serious
mutilation. We have no further proof of the opinion I have
hazarded than is to be drawn from the effect of remedies, a
fact to which I am disposed to attach very considerable im-
portance.

188. Chancres in the urethra may be met with as a solitary Complica-
form of primary venereal infection, or they may coexist with ^g^j' 1
sores situated externally. The case of M'Knight, subsequently ulcers,
recorded, is a proof of this. It very commonly happens, also,
that the presence of external sores, and the absence of dis-
charge from the urethra, prevent any examination of the latter.
In examining, however, a patient who applies with a primary
venereal affection, the canal of the urethra should always be
pressed between the fingers, and the lips of the meatus opened.

A gentleman contracted several small sores situated on the Case,
glans and prepuce ; they were free from pain and irritation, and
healed quickly under ordinary treatment ; the glans, however,
became swollen, red, and shining, and yet there was no external
symptom to account for it. It at length occurred to me to
examine the urethra, and on everting the lips of the meatus
a small sore was discovered, upon which the condition of the
glans was evidently dependent, since it disappeared as soon as
the sore in the urethra healed.



102



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



Prognosis. 189. The prognosis of chancres in the urethra is not always
favorable ; Ricord has shown that by extension to the bladder
they may terminate fatally. The prognosis is again unfavor-
able as regards the integrity of the organs of generation,
since, however carefully they may be watched, severe mutila-
tions are occasionally produced. The chief evils I have
seen arise from chancres in the urethra have been the fol-
lowing : —

Conse- lst - Contraction of the orifice of the urethra by the cica-

quences. trix of the chancre. I attended a gentleman who had a
chancre of the orifice of the urethra, which, in healing, so
contracted the meatus orifice, that it would not admit the
bulbous extremity of an ordinary silver probe.

2d. Contraction of the urethra by the cicatrix of the chancre
where the sore has been situated lower down. To this species
of stricture the term traumatic has been applied. It does not
readily yield to the bougie.

3d. Perforations of the urethra. These are variable in ex-
tent and situation, but are commonly situated immediately
behind the glans. I have said that a very common seat of
chancre of the urethra is the fossa navicularis, and the glans
is sometimes scooped out as it were by the spreading of ve-
nereal ulceration in this situation. I have seen this passage
behind the glans opened for an extent of an inch and a half
by the ravages of an urethral chancre.

4 th. The urethra itself may be completely destroyed to a
greater or less extent. Of this also I have seen one example,
where the passage was destroyed by ulceration for two inches,
and the urethra opened on the under surface of the body of
the penis.

I can conceive of nothing more horrible to a young man
than mutdation of this character, which, in spite of all our
care and attention, will sometimes take place, if the disease
assume a phagedsenic form, and spread by rapid ulceration or
sloughing. They are not, however, so likely to happen if the
disease has been at once diagnosticated and properly treated
from the commencement.



CHANCRES OP TIIE UKETHRA.



103



190. Constitutional symptoms are just as likely to occur in Constitu-
consequence of primary venereal diseases in the urethra, as s ^ pt0 ius.
when such sores are situated externally.

191. The question next arises, how are primary venereal sores Treatment,
situated within the urethra to he treated? The situation of

these sores precludes the adoption of the practice I have re-
commended to be employed in primary venereal sores situated
elsewhere.

The use of caustics is clearly impossible, unless the sore be
situated immediately within the urethra, and even then their
application will require great care and attention, and is not
generally to be recommended.

From the situation of a primary venereal sore in the urethra,
we are prevented employing the local remedies commonly used
in the treatment of chancre ; and an indiscriminate course of
mercury is still more useless and injurious.

The existence of chancre of the urethra being ascertained,
the inflammatory symptoms are to be first subdued, by a
treatment appropriate to the earlier stages of gonorrhoea; diet,
rest, chluents, and cathartic medicines, with emollient injec-
tions. Afterwards we may resort to injections with aromatic
wine, or solutions of the nitrate of silver, or the solid nitrate
may be introduced, and the surface of the sores cauterized, if
the inflammatory symptoms are not too acute, and the chancre
situated within reach. It is useful to introduce a small plug
of lint into the urethra, impregnated with the injection we
employ, with a view of keeping the surface apart, and pre-
venting any extension of the disease.

192. Mercury may be employed, in chancres of the urethra, Mercury,
at the period, and in the manner before recommended in the
treatment of simple primary venereal sores, attending to the

local aspect of the sore during its administration.

The following case illustrates the practice of Cullerier in
these forms of disease.

193. A man entered the venereal hospital, said to have Case,
suffered from gonorrhoea for twelve months, in the treatment

of which copaiba, cubebs, and various astringents had been



104 SYPHILITIC DISEASES.

vainly employed by a variety of surgeons. The discharge
from the patient's account, had never been very profuse • on
pressing the urethra firmly there hardly issued some drops of
pus. The glans was considerably swollen, and its summit the
seat of an induration the size of a nut, surrounding the meatus.
On separating the lips of the orifice a large chancre was
discovered, which had burrowed itself deeply into the parietes
of the canal. This patient had been submitted to several
mercurial courses without benefit, because (says M. Cullerier)
the local treatment of the sore had been neglected. All in-
ternal treatment was now suspended; a strict dietetic regimen
and repose were directed to be observed, and leeches were ap-
plied from time to time. In the intervals, a piece of lint,
covered with opiate cerate, was kept in the urethra; emollient
fomentations were frequently used, and the penis enveloped in
a poultice. Under the influence of these remedies the inflam-
mation soon disappeared, the sore became clean, and a few appli-
cations of the nitrate of silver were sufficient to effect a cure.

194. Robert M'Knight, by trade a Scotch hawker, aged
twenty-nhie, contracted, from the same connexion, sores on
the penis and a running from the urethra, seven years ago.
The ulcers on the penis were cured, very likely by a mercurial
course, as M'Knight has been repeatedly salivated. The treat-
ment which cured the external sores had no effect upon the
discharge from the urethra ; this continued : it has been re-
peatedly treated, but never cured. Soon after this, scaly
blotches appeared on the forehead and other parts of the
body, which disappeared under medical treatment. Disre-
garding the discharge from the urethra, which never disap-
peared, and fancying himself well, our patient now married.
His first child died a few months after birth, covered with
blotches : a second and a third child shared the same fate,
and died under the same circumstances. The wife also had
sores and bloody discharge from the vagina, and blotches on
the body, the husband still having no affection except the
slight running from the urethra, which sometimes attracted
his attention, and at others was totally disregarded.



CHANCRES OP THE URETHRA.



105



During these periods M 'Knight had, at several times, fresh
constitutional symptoms, for which he underwent a variety of
treatment, but was never free from the running from the
urethra. In November, 1843, between six and seven years
after M'Knight contracted his primary disease, he came under
my care as a patient of the Queen's hospital. He was then in
the following state : — The head and face were covered with
foul blotches, which consisted of incrustations or scabs, con-
cealing deep, irregular, and ill-conditioned ulcers ; there was
superficial redness of the fauces, but no ulceration at this time ;
he was feeble and emaciated from long-continued disease.
The skin disease was evidently pustular in its commencement,
as one or two fresh-formed pustules were on the face : these
pustules were situated on an inflamed base, and, when they
broke and discharged, ran into idcers, covered with flat or
conical crusts, thus constituting a variety of disease to which
the term "pustulo-crustaceous" has been applied.

He denied at first having anything the matter with the ge-
nitals, but, on closer questioning, admitted that he had a
running so slight as to be hardly worthy of notice. On exa-
mination I perceived a sanious oozing from the urethra, very
different from that which characterizes chronic gonorrhoea or
gleet. About an inch from the meatus, immediately behind
the glans penis, existed a circumscribed induration, about the
size of a hazel nut : this was painful when pressed between the
fingers, and the pressure occasioned some blood and portions
of white tenacious sloughs to issue from the urethra. On
separating the hps of the meatus urinarius, by means of a
small speculum made for the purpose, the commencement of
ulceration, which appeared to extend deep into the urethra,
could be perceived.

This case is remarkable under many points of view. In
the first place the disease itself (primary venereal sore in the
urethra) is not of every day occurrence, although I have seen
many instances of it ; again, the time which the sore has ex-
isted is remarkable. There is no evidence that M'Knight had
ever contracted a venereal disease subsequent to his marriage i

5 §



10G



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



the evidence of the wife and himself is conclusive upon this
point. The sores which M 'Knight contracted at the same
time he contracted the running were cured previous to his
marriage, the running still remaining ; some days he perceived
none ; yet having no other disease than that in the urethra,
we observe the wife becoming diseased, and three children
dying, with unquestionable venereal affections.

This case is one, then, of primary venereal sore in the
urethra, contracted at the same time with external primary
sores. The primary sores were healed, but the urethral sore
remained uncured, and, marrying in this state, his offspring
all die diseased, and his wife also is affected.

The patient has had repeated attacks of constitutional disease
in the most alarming forms, which have recurred as often as
they have been cured, and this I explain by the sore in the
urethra being still open and poisoned, and thus forming as it
were a well of poison, which is constantly tainting the system.

It is proved by the history of this case, then, which has
been very carefully watched and examined, and the history
very correctly taken, that primary venereal sores may exist
within the urethra for a long period of time. M. Cullerier
has recorded a case of this nature, which had, when presented
to his notice, continued upwards of a year, and was then un-
cured, although the patient had been submitted to repeated
treatments. These sores may be seated in any part of the
urethra, and even in some rare cases extend to the bladder
itself.

Case. 195. Thickening and contraction of the urethra, from the
cicatrices of venereal sores situated in the fossa navicularis ;
chancre of the fossa navicularis.

A middle-aged gentleman came from Lincolnshire to consult
me respecting what he termed an obstruction in his urethra ;
he gave the following history of his case : — About eighteen
months ago, (Sept. 1 843,) shortly after a suspicious intercourse,
he perceived a slight discharge from the orifice of the urethra,
from which there issued some drops of pus ; on separating the
lips of the urethra he perceived within them a small sore. He



CHANCRES OF THE URETHRA.



107



applied to a druggist, who furnished him with an ointment
. which irritated the sore, and made it worse. Some time after
this, a surgeon was consulted, who recommended mercury ;
this was taken till salivation was produced. The sore, how-
ever, did not amend under its use ; it was still to be perceived
when the urethra was examined, and the same discharge of
drops of pus continued.

He consulted, some time after this, a second surgeon, who
cauterized the sore daily with the nitrate of silver ; this pro-
duced hardness of the glans penis, and discharge of sloughs
and blood from the urethra. This state of things continuing,
the patient began to lose confidence in the mode of treatment,
which he abandoned, and, three weeks after the last applica-
tion of the caustic, he consulted me. Copper-coloured spots
made their appearance on several parts of the body, the arms,
and trunk, at this time.

When the patient pressed the urethra forcibly between the
fingers, he brought from it a thick tenacious slough, exactly
resembling that which covers an indurated chancre in its first
or ulcerating stage. The under surface of the glans penis was
red and inflamed, and, when this part was examined between
the fingers, a considerable induration was perceived, which
appeared to exist in the lower part of the fossa navicularis,
just within the urethra. When this induration was pressed,
there issued from the urethra pus, sometimes mixed with blood,
and at times tenacious shreds or portions of sloughs similar to
those already spoken of. I examined the interior of the
urethra for an inch and a half or more, with a small speculum
made for the purpose. A white smooth cicatrix occupied the
whole of the fossa navicidaris on its upper part and sides ; I
could not obtain a clear view of the bottom of the fossa, where
I believe ulceration still existed. This I inferred from the
induration, the redness opposite this part, and the character
of the discharge forced from the urethra when the induration
was pressed between the fingers.

There were no constitutional symptoms in existence either
in the throat, eyes, or vicinity of the anus, since coppered



108



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



Treatment, blotches only occupied the arms and legs. In primary vene-
real sores of the urethra, the local treatment is the main point
to he attended to. I never saw constitutional treatment alone
cure a venereal sore in this part. I recommended the patient
to inject the urethra three times a day with tepid olive oil, and
in the intervals introduced into the passage a thin shred of
soft lint soaked in a solution of tannin and extract of opium. 1
The lint was kept constantly in the urethra, merely being re-
moved when the patient wished to make water. The patient
was also directed to take one grain of the iodide of mercury
with three of the extraot of conium, in a pill, every night, and
to be strictly regular in his mode of life. With very slight
modification in the mode of treatment at first laid down, this
case was brought in a few weeks to a successful issue, the in-
duration and discharge disappeared from the urethra, and the
copper-coloured blotches from the body. There remained
merely some contraction of the urethra, produced by the first
cicatrix which was materially relieved by the bougie. This
constituted what has been termed by some writers " traumatic
stricture," very commonly produced by the cicatrices of pri-
mary venereal sores thus situated, which, when they do not
actually contract the urethra, partially destroy its elasticity,
and produce many troublesome symptoms, more particularly
a dribbling away of the urine for some minutes after the
patient has done making water. This constitutes a species of
incontinence of urine whose cause is to be sought for, not in
the bladder but in the urethra.

1 R. Tannin, gr. x.

Ext. opii pur. gr. ij.

Aquae, 3j. M. ft. lotio.



109



CHAPTER X.



OF PH AGED JEN A.



19C. Instead of following the regular course of primary
syphilis, venereal ulcers sometimes assume a character of rapid
ulceration, sloughing, or inflammation, to which the term
"phagedena" is applied. In treating the various forms of
phagedenic chancres, we must be guided, in the first instance,
by the natural constitution of the patient, and the particular
conditions of his health at the time of his becoming diseased;
the intensity and character of phagedsena, whether inflamed,
foul, or irritable, commonly depending upon the general health
of the patient, or upon the circumstances or situation in which
he happens for the time to be placed. Hence we must guard
against the indiscriminate use of mercury, or of attributing
the violence of the disease to any unusual degree of virulence
in the venereal poison itself.

197. The cause of phagedsena is an interesting matter of Causes of
„ . i . . „ t, . . phagedena

inquiry. Desruelles, in the true spirit ol Broussaism, attri-
butes it to irritation of the viscera, a chronic gastritis, or gastro-
enteritis. Ricord believes also that there is commonly an
accompanying visceral irritation, but he believes, moreover,
that a cold damp atmosphere disposes primary sores to be-
come phagedsenic. Mr. Mayo states " that what gives the
phagedsenic character to sores on the genitals after infection
is some peculiarity of the general habit." This is, perhaps,
true, but the difficulty is to know in what this peculiarity
consists.



110 SYPHILITIC DISEASES.

SgSna ! 98 ; Pna S eda3na is g«««lly Med into the ulcerative
and sloughing. Dr. Wallace has attempted a classification
which he thinks « may be of some practical importance towards
the discrimination and management of these frequently formi-
dable diseases." 1

treatment 1 ^ l0Cal remedies best suited to different varieties
of simple phagedsena are, the nitrate of silver, either solid or
in saturated solution, applied with a pencil ; the pure nitric
or nitro-muriatic acids, the white muriate of antimony, or a
saturated solution of the bichloride of mercury in alcohol.
In the sloughing or foul varieties of the simple phagedena,
alternate dressings of the aromatic wine and a detergent oint-
ment 2 may be employed ; the surface of these sores may be
washed frequently with strong solutions of the chlorides of
soda and lime.

Inflamed 200. In the inflamed variety we must employ rest, general
variety. and local ti 00 di ett i n g j emollient fomentations or lotions, and
poultices, purgatives, antimonials, and abstinence. In this
variety with white or black slough, Dr. Wallace thinks the
application of the nitrate of silver hurtful ; and in fact we
should do well to observe what he says of its use in phagedsena
generally— that, used too long, or repeated too often, it will
produce consequences in some respects as unpleasant as those
which residt from an overdose of mercury. In the inflamed
phagedsena, with or without slough, a purely antiphlogistic
treatment, with anodyne fomentations and poultices, is the



1 Phagedenic Primary Syphilis :



1. Without slough.

a. Simple.

b. Inflamed.

c. Irritable.



2. With white slough.

a. Simple.

b. Inflamed.

c. Irritable.



With black slough.

a. Simple.

b. Inflamed.

c. Irritable.



Fx.



Terebinthinae, ^j.
Vitelli ovi,

Olei hyperici, Jss. M.
Mix the turpentine with the yelks of eggs carefully in a stone
mortar, and add gradually the oil of St. John's wort.



PHAGEDENA.



Ill



safest practice ; leaving the application of stimulants and caus-
tics till all local and constitutional irritation has subsided.

201. The irritable phagedsenic ulcer demands a local treat- instable
ment different from that of either of the before-mentioned phagedena
varieties. Some surgeons employ the nitrate of sdver, the

liquor arsenicalis, or the strong nitrous acid. These, however,
frequently dispose the rdceration to spread, particularly where
the sore is surrounded by a diffused areola. When this is the
case, the opiate cerate, or strong aqueous solution of opium,
may be employed, whdst this remedy should be given freely
at the same time by the mouth. Amongst preparations of this
character, Dr. Wallace speaks bighly of mercurial ointment,
with the ext. opii, a drachm of the latter to an ounce of the
former, or the mel rosse with laudanum. As a general appli-
cation to these sores in my own practice, I have succeeded
better with turnip or carrot poultices than with almost any
other form of remedy. There are, however, individual cir-
cumstances depending on the character of the sore, its degree
of indolence, irritability, or inflammation, in which the reme-
dies I have mentioned will find their application.

202. Surgeons are divided as to the propriety of a mercu- M ercur y j n
rial treatment m phagedsenic primary syphilis, Mr. Carmichael phagedena
agreeing with the French school in rejecting the remedy as

most dangerous and deceptive in every variety of the disease.
"The miserable mutilation and sufferings," says he, "which
our soldiers endured in Portugal from phagedsenic and slough-
ing ulcers, at the commencement of the Peninsular war, by
the exhibition of mercury, might have inspired the deputy-
inspector of hospitals with a desire to obtain information on
the treatment of venereal complaints from every source ; for
our army-surgeons soon discovered that the black lion of
Portugal, as the sloughing ' ulcer was termed, could not be
tamed by mercury, and that, without giving a grain of it, the
Portuguese practitioners knew better howto effect theirobject."
Sir G. Ballingall, after an experience of many years, informs
us, in a recent work, that he quite accords with Mr. Carmichael.
Mr. Key, in his Keports of the primary Syphilitic Cases occur-



112 SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



ring at Guy's hospital, states, that, in the constitutional treat-
ment of these sores, mercury is wholly inadmissible. " It
tends," he says, « to increase irritability, to lower the powers
of the patient, and therefore to quicken the phagedenic action.
Loss of rest, and the irritability of the arterial and nervous
systems to which it gives rise, are the prominent points in
these cases." I perfectly agree with these authors in con-
demning the use of mercury generally in phagedsenic primary
syphilis ; yet I am of opinion, (and the result of every day's
experience confirms this opinion,) that there are cases of this
character frequently occurring in which mercury, judiciously
employed, is our best remedy ; and this is just the way in
which Ricord views the question, when, in speaking of pha-
gedsenic chancres, he says (p. 573), "there are circumstances
under which a mercurial treatment is followed by the best
results, and this fact is constantly proved by the practice of
those who avow the most deadly hatred to mercury." It re-
mains, however, to be determined what are the forms of pha-
gedeena in which mercury may be employed with advantage.
It may be impossible, in the present state of science, to point
out with certainty what these circumstances are. If the dis-
ease continue to advance, in spite of the usual remedies, judi-
ciously employed ; as a sort of forlorn hope, recourse may be
had to mercury, first in form of a local application, and sub-
sequently by the mouth or by friction. In the continuance of
the remedy we must be guided by the effects produced, conti-
nuing it if the disease appears inclined to yield, or giving it
up should it still continue to extend. Mr. Lawrence, whilst
he condemns the indiscriminate use of mercury in phagedsena,
believes there are circumstances in which it may be employed
with advantage, though he does not seem able to point out
what these circumstances are. He states that it has often
happened to him to see cinnabar fumigations employed as a
local remedy in phagedaenic ulcerations of the thi-oat acciden-
tally cause copious salivation ; and that, in many instances
where he had seen this, he had found that the local disease in
the throat, as well as in other parts, proceeded very favorably



PHAGEDENA.



113



so that he would not lay it down as an absolute rule that
mercury ought never to be employed in these cases, in refe-
rence to its general effect upon the system.

The recorded experience of most modern writers on sy-
philis, to whatever school they may belong, proves that there
are constantly occurring cases of phagedsena so intractable
under the ordinary treatment that mercury is fled to as a last
resource ; and there are many of these in which it is perfectly
successful. " Nor must it be denied that occasionally a short
and brisk course of mercury will give a new turn to the com-
plaint, and cause these troublesome sores at once to close.
This remedy, however, should be the last resorted to." 1

203. Some have endeavoured to discriminate between those
forms of phagedsena in which mercury should be used and
those in which it shoidd be abstained from. "All the varie-
ties of phagedsenic primary syphdis have hitherto been very
much confounded together, to the injury of the patient and
the confusion of the practitioner." Dr. Wallace's classifica-
tion of these sores is not founded on the incipient or primary
character of the sore, but upon the appearance it may assume
during its course, which evidently depend on constitutional
causes, the chief divisions being founded upon the degree of
irritability or inflammation attending a primary sore, or the
character of the slough with which it may be covered ; this
will be seen by referring to Dr. Wallace's table already quoted.
In the first variety of phagedaena, the simple primary sore,
without slough, characterized merely by an unusual persist-
ence or activity of the specific action attendant on the ulcera-
tive stage of primary syphdis, Dr. Wallace thinks mercury
almost indispensable, and recommends the patient to be brought
as quickly as possible under its influence. " But," he adds,
"if the patient has been dabbling with mercurial remedies,
and if there be reason to suppose that his constitution has been
in consequence more or less disordered, we shall act more judi-
ciously by suspending for a time the use of mercury, and en-



Mayo on Syphilis, p. 20.



114 SYPHILITIC DISEASES.

deavour, by proper measures, but principally by attention to
the mode of living of our patient, and by the use of the mine-
ral acids with sarsaparilla, to restore the system to a state of
tranquillity before we enter again on mercurial treatment,
which may, however, be then used with success.

204. In the inflamed variety of simple phagedsena, the first
indications are the reduction of the inflammation, according to
the principles already laid down. Mercury may be used at
the discretion of the practitioner when the ulcer has put on
the reparative process, in the way already recommended for
simple primary sores.
Mercury 205. In the irritable variety of simple phagedsena without
in'thekri- sl0U8hj mercur y is to be interdicted. In this form of the dis-
table forms ease the remedy is always injurious, and, if persevered in, pro-
duces an increase " of irritability, local and general, and hectic
symptoms of a very unmanageable kind may result." In this
form, conium, hyoscyamus, opium, and Dover's powder, (but
more particularly opium,) locally and generally, are the chief
remedies to be relied on, with sarsaparilla in conjunction with
the iodide of potassium, or the mineral acids, or the cold in-
fusion of sarsaparilla in lime water. 1 It is in these cases Mr.
Lawrence also thinks the sarsaparilla most beneficial. In the
true form of phagedsena without slough, Dr. Wallace recom-
mends a full course of mercury in the first or simple, an active
antiphlogistic treatment to precede the mercurial in the second
or inflamed variety, and measures calculated to tranquillize the
system in the third or irritable.

Occasion- ^6. In the "simple phagedsenic primary syphilis, with
ally useful white slough," Dr. Wallace recommends mercury to be freely
phag^diEna exm bited, " wherever it may be seated, and of whatever extent
it may be." With the constitution, however, in which this
sore occurs mercury is very apt to disagree ; and, although

1 R. Rad. sarzaj, Jiv.

Ead. glycirrhizae, jss.
Liq. calcis, Oij. M.
Macera per horas 24, in vase vitreo, et in loco frigido, dein cola
in usum. Capiat poculum magnum bis die.



PHAGEDENA.



115



the disease may be influenced beneficially, and the remedy
properly administered, may quickly excite such sores to sepa-
rate their sloughs, and cicatrize ; a prolonged use of the remedy
commonly induces a state which Dr. Wallace calls "febrile
mercurial irritation ;" and if mercury be continued after this
condition of the system has been induced, the sore soon becomes
« stationary and sensitive," and afterwards "painful and spread-
ing," whilst secondary symptoms of a malignant character
frequently set in.

207. This species of disease is particularly liable to occur Frequent
at the orifice of the urethra, or just within the opening of the ^
glans penis ; [ and I have seen cases characterized to the patient
on the onset merely by a sanious discharge from the urethra,
where this passage has been speedily perforated, and the glans
partially or totally lost. I would impress upon the surgeon
the necessity of examining the urethra in all discharges from
it of this kind, since in many instances, two of which are now
under under my own care, these discharges are from the sur-
face of a white phagedsenic chancre seated just within the
orifice of the urethra.

The characters of the " inflamed phagedsenic primary sore
with white slough" are, a slough of white colour at the junc-
ture of the sore with the living parts, which parts are in a
state of inflammation. The distinctive character of the sore
is to be drawn from the colour of the slough at the junction
of the ulcerative with the living parts, and not from the colour
of the slough on other parts of the sore, since these occasionally
become black or green from the exposure of the surface to the
atmosphere. The first indication in the treatment of this sore
is the reduction of the inflammation by an active antiphlo-
gistic treatment, employed, according to the circumstances of
the case, generally and locally. I would beg, however, the
attention of the reader more particularly to the point I am now
endeavouriug to make more clear, viz. the indications for the
use of mercury in the different forms of phagedsena ; and with



1 See the Chapter on Primary Sores of the Urethra.



116



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



respect to the sore under notice, Dr. Wallace states that he
has ascertained " an important fact— that mercury, if given in
full doses, or so as to produce rapidly its effects on the system,
will control, even in its most inflamed state, the progress of
the phagedsenic disease just described."

Dr. Wallace does not mean to say that this practice should
in all cases he ordinarily adopted, but believes that in many
cases it will afford the chief, if not the only protection to the
patient when the disease is making havoc amongst parts of
greatest importance. When employed in this form of disease,
it must be combined with an antiphlogistic general treatment,
as general and local bleeding, and nauseating doses of antimo-
nials. In support of this opinion, Dr. Wallace adduces a case
of obstinate and destructive inflammatory phagedsena. In
this instance, " much time had been spent in fruitless endea-
vours to control the progress of the disease ;" the usual reme-
dies had been tried in vain, till the prepuce was lost, with part
of the glans, and a large portion of the covering of the testi-
cles. So great was the attendant irritability and inflammation
that " mercury was the last remedy one would have ventured
to try." The patient was importunate, and threatened to leave
the hospital if mercury were not used. Large alterative doses
had been employed without effect ; it was now given in full
doses. " His mouth was made very sore, and the progress
of the disease was not only controlled, but almost entirely
stopped." Dr. Wallace noticed that "wherever the disease
had been extending by a white slough, there or in such parts,
though inflamed, the mercurial treatment had acted most bene-
ficially ; but that, on the contrary, at some points, where the
sore was extending by a black slough, its progress remained
uncontrolled or rather aggravated." Dr. Wallace is not satis-
fied with the degree of inflammation surrounding a primary
sore as a rule for the non-employment of mercury, and founds
his opinion upon the value of mercury freely administered in
syphilitic iritis, and upon the fact that mercurial fumigations,
in certain destructive sore3 of the throat, are frequently very
beneficial, though attended apparently by great inflammatory



PHAGED.EXA.



117



action. The result of Dr. Wallace's experience in the employ-
ment of mercury in these cases has led him to establish a rule
to which we are disposed to attach very considerable import-
ance : "That although that form of inflammation which super-
venes when a patient is under a mercurial course is sure to be
aggravated by persisting in the use of mercury, this remedy
.will powerfully assist to subdue inflammation which com-
menced under different circumstances."

208. In the "irritable variety of phagedsena with white Irritable
slough," Dr. Wallace also thinks a short but full course of^ 6 ^.™
mercury the best remedy, if the case have not been previously slough,
mismanaged. When it is used it must be very carefully watched,

and combined with large doses of opium, Dover's powder,
cicuta, hyoscyamus, sarsaparilla, and the carbonate of ammo-
nia, whilst the local treatment must be anodyne and unsti-
mulating. All the forms of phagedsena with white slough
are, in the opinion of Dr. Wallace, favorably influenced by
mercury. He considers this form of disease to be the result
of inordinate action ; " syphilis in an acute form, modified by
peculiar states of constitution." Tbese peculiar states of con-
stitution, of whatever nature they may be, must render the
surgeon circumspect in the employment of mercury, particu-
larly in the onset of the disease, or as a specific remedy ; but
where the ulceration spreads with rapidity, uninfluenced by
the general treatment, and threatens tbe loss of important
parts, mercury must be used ; but, until our path be more
clear, we shall run much less risk, in doubtful cases, of doing
mischief by refraining from, than by employing, mercury.

209. The "simple primary phagedsena with black slough" Simple
of Dr. Wallace is analogous to the sloughing ulcer of M. Bacot, ^^Jjj^
and is evidently merely a variety of the true Hunterian chancre, slough.

an indurated primary sore," with a dark or livid coloured slough.
Its characters are "much greater induration of the surround-
ing parts than any of the other forms of primary phagedsena,
scarcely any inflammation, and attended by very little sensi-
bility." Dr. Wallace states that it requires hardly any other
form of treatment than the regular primary disease. It is



118



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



often very much benefited by the internal employment of tbe
nitrous or nitro-muriatic acids ; but " the actions of reparation
and perfect cicatrization may be produced in it with much
more certainty, in a much shorter time, and with less expense
to the constitution, by a mild and well-regulated course of
mercury than by any other means."

210. This disease, however, generally occurs in constitu-
tions very susceptible of the mercurial influence, and hence
the exhibition of the remedy requires more caution in its
management than in the simple primary sores. Great advan-
tage will be derived from the occasional interruption of the
medicine, and from substituting, during its omission, remedies
that are calculated to improve the general health, and tran-
quillize the nervous system.

Gangre ^ e two remamm S fo rms of phagedena are the in-

nous pha- flamed and irritable varieties with black slough, the sloughing
gedtena. phagedsena of authors generally, tbe gangrenous ulcer of
Mr. Bacot, and the "chancre phagedenique gangreneux" of
Ricord. In these forms all writers agree in condemning the
use of mercury ; the disease is to be treated on tbe principles
which should regulate us in the management of similar dis-
eases arising from causes not syphilitic.

It must be recollected, however, when the sore has been
brought to granulate and heal by proper remedies, tbat it bas
had a venereal origin, and perhaps has succeeded to a regular
primary sore, rendered gangrenous by irregularities and bad
management, and tbat it may be followed by secondary symp-
toms. " It is more than probable," says Mr. Bacot, " that
secondary symptoms will not ensue ; and, if they should, it
will be time enough to arrest them when they appear. But it
is, I think, not only fair towards the patient, but prudent,
to explain to him the probabilities of the case, that his atten-
tion may be awakened by any deviation from bis usual state
of health, and that no time be lost under a mistaken view of
his condition.

212. It will be evident from what has been already stated
that mercury is not to be generally employed in phagedasna,



PHAGEDENA.



119



although there are cases in which its use may he beneficial.
Venesection, and tartar emetic 1 in the inflammatory forms ;
the dilute nitric acid or the hydriodate of potass with sarsapa-
rilla, opium in large doses to allay pain, &c. are the remedies
most commonly useful. In the way of local treatment, which
is very important, no applications are hetter than strong nitric
acid, or the acrid nitrate of mercury " used freely to the sore,
and repeated till a clean vascular surface comes into view."
The first or second application is not attended with consider-
able pain, as the disorganized surface tends to protect the
more sensitive parts underneath ; hut as the slough becomes
detached, the pain is increased on each successive application.
If the slough be reproduced it may be dressed with equal
parts of balsam of Peru and castor oil. 2 Dr. Tuohill, of Dublin,
has employed creasote with success in phagedsenic ulceration,
after the failure of other remedies. (See his communication in
Dr. Graves's "Clinical Medicine," p. 383.) This gentleman
has also used belladonna as a local application with benefit ; a
piece of the extract, the size of a pea, rubbed down with a
dessert-spoonful of water. The sore is dressed with lint,
soaked in this solution, and covered with oiled silk.

213. Secondary phagedsenic ulceration is exceedingly com-
mon in the throat, and attacks patients whose constitutions
have been broken down by protracted syphilis, and the inju-
dicious or excessive use of mercury. The ulcers may be
touched with the "acid nitrate of mercury," and the patient

1 Carmichael's antimonial solution.

R. Antimonii tartarizati, gr. iv.
Tincturte opii, 3j.
Tinct. card, co., Jss-
Syrupi, Jss.
Aquae, gvij. M.

Administered in the simple or compound decoction of sarsa in cases of
primary venereal sores, where much inflammation is present; also in the
feverish or early stages of all venereal eruptions.

2 See "Egan" On Primary and Secondary Phagedena. (Dublin Journal,
January, 1845.)



120



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



treated with the internal remedies already spoken of. The
sarsaparilla broth, given to patients who are weak, or have
been badly fed, is a very good remedy. 1 The secondary skin
diseases succeeding to primary phagedsena are generally of a
rupial character, (Carmichael ;) they may also assume the pa-
pular or pustular form. The pustules become covered with
thick black crusts, which, on falling, leave a sore which has a
disposition to heal in the centre, whilst it spreads on the
edges.

1 R. Decoct, sarsse. comp. lb.ss.
Carnis bovis, lb.ss.
Coque siniul super lento igne ad dimidium, sumatur quotidie (calidum).



121



CHAPTER XI.

OP VENEREAL ULCERS IN THE FEMALE.

214. Primary venereal ulcers in the female are frequently Situation,
seated in the external parts, as the labia majora, the nyniphse,
the folds of the mucus surrounding the clitoris, and at the
orifice of the vagina. There are, however, constantly pre-
sented to our notice females who have no trace of disease
on the external parts, but who apply for assistance because
they have produced disease in healthy men who have cohabited
with them. On examination with the speculum these females
are found to suffer from different forms of disease of the neck
of the womb which are not manifested by any external sign,
or in fact by any symptom whatever. The affection of the
neck of the womb presents numerous forms, many of which
are capable of producing ulcers of the penis from cohabi-
tation. In the first form, the neck of the uterus is red and Varieties,
swollen, but not in a state of true ulceration. If ero-
sions exist, they are too slight to be perceived by the naked
eye. The condition of the- neck of the womb in this variety
of complaint resembles very much that of the glans penis in
balanitis or external gonorrhoea. Frequently the neck is
covered with ulcerations, more or less numerous and deep, from
which oozes a virulent sanies. These are in all probability
true chancres. They resemble chancres of the penis in their
history, duration, and more particularly in the fluid they
secrete. OccasionaUy the true indurated chancre is found in
the neck of the womb, though this form is not so commonly

6



122



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



Treatment, met with as the other varieties. It is not necessary to enter
into any details as to the treatment of primary venereal ulcers
in the female ; they are to be dealt with in the same manner
as primary venereal sores generally, the situation in which
they are found is the only circumstance which can in any
respect modify the treatment ; and hence it is almost impos-
sible to cure them properly without the aid of the speculum
to separate the parts for the purpose of cleaning them tho-
roughly by injection, or applying any local remedies the nature
Circum- of the sores may require. The situation in which these sores

stances occur renders their speedy cure very difficult ; for, whilst
which ren- . t . -. . '

derthecure chancres of the penis are generally healed m two or three

tedious. weeks, these diseases of the neck"of the womb commonly re-
quire as many months. In the deep-seated parts of the vagina,
chancres are rare. These sores may exist for an indefinite
period without producing constitutional symptoms, and with-
out the patient being aware of their existence. Many of these
conditions accompany the constitutional forms of disease, and
many again though coexisting with syphilis are not specific,
but the result of ordinary inflammatory action. 1



1 I must again refer the reader to Dr. Bennet's admirable monograph,
on this subject, already quoted. See also Gibert's ' Manual des Maladies
Veneriennes,' which contains some excellent remarks on primary and
secondary venereal ulceration of the os uteri.



123



CHAPTER XII.

or BUBO. 1

215. Bubo may be of two kinds, either simple or syphilitic, Its va-
and may be either a primary or secondary affection, succeeding neties>
either to chancre, gonorrhoea, or balanitis, or making its ap-
pearance without any one of these diseases having preceded it.

The true venereal bubo is most commonly preceded by one of
the affections I have mentioned, but may occur, though rarely,
as a primary syphilitic symptom; it is then termed "bubon
d'emblee." Authors are divided as to the frequency of its
occurrence under the latter form ; I believe it to be rare. It
very commonly happens that the most formidable buboes suc-
ceed to affections so trivial, that they have even escaped the
observation of the patient; and hence we shall frequently,
when called to treat buboes which are said to have been pre-
ceded by no other syphilitic affection, discover, on drawing
back the prepuce, a slight balanitis or excoriation, or the fresh
cicatrix of some trivial ulcer. The syphilitic bubo may, how-
ever, occur as a primary symptom.

216. Bubo may be, as I have said, either simple or syphi- Inoculation
litic, sympathetic or virulent. Ricord has instituted the test

of inoculation as a means of differential diagnosis between the
two. The virulent bubo, that arising from the absorption of
pus from a chancre, is a disease precisely similar to chancre,
differing from it only in its seat and in the anatomical organi-



1 Adenitis.



124



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



zation of the parts in which it is seated. The true venereal
buho is the only one which gives a characteristic pustule by
inoculation ; and is the only certain means of enabling us to
determine whether a bubo is venereal or sympathetic. In
cases where bubo occurs as a primary symptom, this test be-
comes of the utmost importance, since by its results alone can
we be led to frame a rational plan of treatment.
Causes. 217. The causes of bubo are various: in addition to their
true venereal origin, they frequently arise from excessive indul-
gence in venereal pleasures with a healthy female ; they may
also result from fatigue, long journies taken on foot, sudden
and violent exertion, or from ulcers situated upon any part of
the lower extremities. It may generally be assumed that the
bubo d'emblee is not syphilitic, so rare is its occurrence as a
venereal affection in this form. Any stimulus, acting for a
longer or shorter period of time upon the parts contained
in the inguinal region, is liable to be followed by simple
bubo. 1

Abortive 218. It is of great importance to the patient that bubo
treatment, should be dispersed, if possible, and not suffered to suppurate,
the latter process involving a long and most troublesome dis-
ease, fraught with endless inconvenience, pain, and even danger.
In the first stage of bubo, when the inflammatory symptoms
are not marked, M. Eicord recommends rest and compression.
This author has remarked that, in patients wearing trusses,
buboes are seldom if ever developed on the side where the
pressure of the truss is acting, but on the opposite one ; hence
in the first stage of bubo, that of mere enlargement, without
any acute inflammatory action or pain, a well-regulated pres-
sure, by means of an appropriate bandage or apparatus, is fre-
quently successful in dispersing the tumour. This plan of
treatment is above all useful in the bubo "d'emblee." It
must be associated with an antiphlogistic regimen, rest, and
gentle aperients.

i See the remarks of M. Beaumes on this subject, Journal de Medecine
et Chirurgie Pratique, art. 427 and 936.



BUBO.



219. The same plan of treatment may be followed in the Use of
treatment of the true syphilitic bubo, unattended by much mercn5r *
pain or inflammation. In this stage, unless specially contra-
indicated, mercury may be employed to assist the resolution

of the tumour. The primary syphilitic bubo may, (says Dr.
Wallace,) in its first stage, be resolved, in ninety-nine cases
out of a hundred, by mercury ; if this medicine be used after
the plan recommended for primary syphilis, and if its opera-
tion be assisted by rest, laxatives, abstinence, and cooling
lotions. 1 It is well, in reference to this opinion, to remark,
that a vast number of those buboes which succeed to true
chancres are sympathetic, that is, when they suppurate, they
do not furnish or secrete a specific pus. Hence it must be
evident that the general employment of mercury is, to say the
least, unnecessary, except so far as it may be used with a view
of controlling inflammatory action. Cullerier thinks that, at
this period, uncertain as we must be as to the true character
of the bubo, that it should be treated as a pure and simple in-
flammation. When accompanied by chancre, it is of vast import-
ance to our success in the resolution of the bubo to allay all
pain or irritation which may exist in the sores themselves ,
and for this purpose the aqueous solution of opium before re-
commended will be found of great service.

220. When the commencement of bubo is accompanied by Antiphlo-
much pain, tenderness on pressure, or heat of parts, the local ^^ treat "
abstraction of blood may be necessary, although I have not a

high opinion of this measure in the resolution of bubo gene-
rally. It may even be necessary to bleed from the arm if the
patient be plethoric, and the local disease associated with
general excitement or much symptomatic fever. In local
bleedings thus employed, it wUl be found advantageous to
apply a small number of leeches, from four to eight, or more,
and wait till the oozing of blood begins to cease, then to apply
another relay of leeches so as to keep up a constant draining
of blood from the part for twelve or more hours. This form



' Op. cit. p. 356.



126



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



abortive
treatment



of bleeding, termed "permanent," is found to reduce the in-
flammation more certainly and speedily than the application
of a large number of leeches at once. Two, three, or more
relays of leeches may be thus employed, proportionate to the
strength of the patient and the intensity of the local disease.
Malapert's 221. The method originally proposed by M. Malapert, a
French army-surgeon, is perhaps well calculated to disperse
the incipient bubo. This method consists in the application
of blisters, and a solution of the bichloride of mercury. 1 The
bubo is to be covered with a blister about the size of half-a-
crown, larger or smaller, according to the size of the tumour;
the following day, when the epidermis is detached, a small
portion of lint is to be moistened in a solution of the bichloride
of mercury, 2 and laid upon the denuded surface. This is to
be kept in its place for two hours by bandages, or strips of
adhesive plaster ; when it is removed a dark brown eschar will
be found already formed. The parts are now to be covered
with a simple poultice, a coohng lotion, or a solution of opium,
and the patient is to be kept as quiet as possible till the eschar
thus produced has separated ; when this has taken place the
tumour is found materially diminished, or altogether gone.
If the tumour be of large size, or very indolent, a second or
even third repetition of the process may become necessary.

222. Hundreds of cases of bubo have been, and are daily,
thus treated successfully in the French army, without the pa-
tients being confined to bed, or without their taking mercury
internally, or using it by friction. M. Malapert's patients
have taken during the time of treatment the decoction of
sarsaparilla, but this is not considered at all essential to the
success of the treatment. M. Malapert employed blisters with
cauterization chiefly against the incipient bubo either indolent

1 Archives generales de Medecine, Mars 1832. Du traitement des
maladies veneriennes par l'application directe du deuto-chlorure de mercure
en dissolution sur les tissues affectes primitivement ou consecutivement.

2 R. Hydrargyri bichloridi gr. xx.
Aqua; destillatse, ^j.



BUBO.



127



cn-inflamed ; since that time a paper has been presented to the
Academy by M. Reynaud, of Toulon, in which the same pro-
cess has been directed with almost equal success against bubo
in its second and third stages, even where the coUection of
pus has been considerable. The plan of MM. Malapert and
Reynaud has now been universally adopted in the French
Venereal Hospital by Cullerier and Ricord with most marked
success. The former of these authors says, we have tried this
practice for three years in this hospital, under circumstances
the most varied ; it is a method really efficacious, and ought
to hold a distinguished rank in the treatment of bubo : in the
first stage of this affection, M. Cullerier states that he does
not recollect having seen it fail.

223. This plan of treatment is most certain in its effects When most
when employed in the first stage of bubo, when the inflam- efficacious,
matory symptoms do not run high ; it may be resorted to in

all other forms of the affection, but not with so well-grounded
a hope of its success. When the tumour has involved to much
extent the cellular tissue of the groin, and the accompanying
inflammation is great, it will be well, by local or general bleed-
ing, rest, cooling lotions, and mild aperients, to mitigate at
least the inflammation before the blister, &c. is resorted to.
Indeed, in the employment of this method, we are not to lose
sight of those other means of known efficacy which the esta-
blished practice of surgery indicates. Frictions of mercurial
ointment, with or without the iodide of potassium, may be
rubbed upon the base of the tumour at the same time, or the
sore left by the separation of the eschar dressed with an oint-
ment of this character.

224. Other caustics may be employed to form an eschar Caustics to
on the surface denuded by the blister, such as the sulphate of ^ employ-
copper, in the proportion of two drachms to the ounce of

water, the nitrate of sdver, the chloride of zinc, or tincture of
iodine. These, however, are not preferable to the bichloride
of mercury. 1

1 Dr. Wallace resorts to a similar mode of practice in the treatment of
indolent buboes; this consists in " the vesication of the surface of the



128



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



225. When a bubo has suppurated, this method maybe
still employed with success if the skin covering the abscess is
thick; at this period it very commonly succeeds in dispersing
the bubo without having recourse to the knife, &c. If the
integuments- are thin and the collection of pus on the point of
discharging itself, it ought not to be used.
Objections. 226. The objections to the use of this plan are the pain the
application of the caustic occasions, which, however, is of short
duration, and the cicatrix which the healing of the sore, after
the eschar has separated, leaves behind. Both these evils,
however, are trivial when compared with the inconvenience
experienced from a bubo which has been allowed to suppurate. 1
227. M. Ricord thinks that this method, however certain
in its operation, should be used only in cases of bubo succeed-
ing to chancre, and which maybe presumed of a virulent cha-
racter. He is of this opinion, because the buboes which
succeed to excoriations upon the genitals not of a specific
character, or to gonorrhoea, or which are d'emblee, have very
little tendency to suppurate, and hence the inconvenience and
pain of the process may be spared. In these cases M. Ricord
prefers pressure with discutient plasters or lotions ; compresses
soaked in solutions of the acetate of lead, or muriate of am-
monia, 2 or plasters of belladonna, lead, iodine, or mer-



tuniour with the nitrate of silver, if there be not much increase of heat in
the part."

1 See the remarks by Cullerier, on the employment of this method, in
Lucas Championniere, Therapeutique de la Syphilis, p. 356 et suivantes ;
also by M. Ricord, pp. 582-4.



2 R. Plumbi acetat., 9ij.

Aquae, Jxvj. M. (Ricord.)
This is the " eau blanche" of the French hospitals.

R. Ammon. muriat., 3ij.
Acidi acetic.
Sp. vini, aa jij.
Ext. belladonnas, 3j.
Aqua; rosaj, jjxiv. M.



BUBO.



129



cury. 1 When much pain and tenderness exist, Weeding becomes
necessary, with the application of strong aqueous solutions of
opium.

228. In the treatment of indolent bubo, in the commence- Indolent
ment, M. Ricord has recourse to the discutient plasters with u, ° -
compression in the day time, and friction with the iodide of
potassium, or mercurial ointment, in the evening, covering the

part during the night with a poultice. If this has not a
marked effect upon the enlargement in a few days, blisters
with the bichloride of mercury on Malapert's plan are em-
ployed. Frictions with ointments composed of the iodide
of mercury, 2 or compresses soaked in a dilute tincture of
iodine 3 , are also very useful in the resolution of the chronic or
indolent bubo.

229. The disease may terminate in two ways: the enlarged Termina-
glands may pass on slowly to suppuration, or assume a form tions -

of induration of a scirrhous or scrofulous character. In the
latter form, frictions with croton oil, the tincture of iodine,

1 For this purpose may be employed the " Emp. Ammoniac, c. Hydrar-
gyro" of the London Pharmacopoeia, the Emp. de Vigo of which I have
already given the form, p. 72 ;

or,

R. Emp. belladonna;, pts. 8.
Plumbi iodidi, pt. 1. M.

R. Emp. " de Vigo" c. mercurio, pts. 4.

Extract, belladonnas, pt. 1. M. (Dupuytren.)

R. Emp. Belladonna;, Jiv.
Iodinii, 5j. M.

R. Emp. hydrargyri, siv.
Iodinii, 3j. M.

2 R. Hydrargyri iodidi, 9j.

Adipi, 3j. M. ft. unguent.

R. Tinct. iodinii, §j.

Aquae destillat. Jij. M. ft. lotio.

6§



130



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



or the emp. belladonna* with tartar emetic, may be used as
local applications. Small issues may also be formed over the
indurations by means of the caustic potash, or if the disease
assume a purely scirrhous character, extirpation may become
necessary. The progress, complication, and termination of
bubo will depend very materially upon the constitution of the
patient, and the condition of his general health ; hence, the
latter demands the strictest attention on the part of the prac-
titioner. The organs of digestion, and the state of the viscera
of the chest, and abdomen, should be carefully attended to ;
we must, to the utmost of our power, take care that no com-
plication on the part of the latter organs interfere with the
local disease, and endeavour by appropriate treatment to com-
bat any general cachectic state that may be in existence, and
which may not only prevent the resolution of the tumour in
the groin, but favour the extension of disease to other parts of
the glandular system. For these purposes an antiphlogistic
treatment may be necessary on the one hand, whilst, on the
other, the internal exhibition of mercury, iodine, or sarsaparilla
may be useful, either simply or in any of the forms of combi-
nation which have been previously indicated.
Treatment 230. When fluctuation is evident, more particularly if the
"nation is " s ^ n covering the tumour be thin, it will generally be useless
evident. to lose time in attempting longer the resolution of the tumour.

It will, as a general principle, be better to open it at once,
either with the scalpel or the knife. Dr. Wallace beheves that
buboes in their stage of suppuration may be resolved by mer-
cury if it has not been used earher in tbe disease ; and M.
Reynaud has succeeded in dispersing them by the blister with
caustics. These remedies are, however, to say the least, un-
certain at this period, and we are more likely to save time, and
our patient's constitution, by opening the bubo at once.

23 1 . The bubo may have suppurated freely, and the col-
lection of matter be large, and the surrounding tissue little
indurated, or there may be much surrounding induration, and
the collection of matter small and deep seated. In all cases
the best general rule of practice is to open the bubo as soon



BUBO.



131



as fluctuation is evident. 1 " When it is deemed prudent to
do this before the process of ulceration has ceased, or, in
other words, where pus exists only in the centre of the tumour,
and whilst this purulent matter is still surrounded by a morbid
texture passing into the state of liquefaction, it will be indis-
pensable to make our incision proportioned, both in its depth
and extent, to the size of the tumour ; for unless it be made
deep, we may not reach the purulent focus ; 2 and unless it be
made extensive, or through such parts as are in progress to
suppuration, we shall not stop this process ; and before it is
completed the opening we have made may close up from tu-
mefaction, and the patient be thus exposed to the necessity of
a fresh operation, or else to wait the discharge of the matter
by the natural actions of the part. Whereas, if we make an
incision sufficiently extensive, we shall not only avoid these
evils, but also diminish very considerably the extent of the
disease. In fact, incision into a bubo, when in the state of
incipient suppuration, will in general as effectually put a stop
to its progress as it will to that of anthrax when in an analo-
gous state. I would even say further, that we may perhaps
uniformly stop the increase of bubo by a sufficiently free in-
cision in its first, second, or third stage, i. e. before matter is
formed." 3

232. When the integuments covering a bubo are of a deep Blue colour
blue colour, more or less disorganized, or threatening gangrene, o{ t,ie inte -
it is better to open the abscess with the potassa fusa, or some S" ments -
other caustic, than by simple incision. Where it is impos-
sible to save the integuments, from their thinness and the de-
gree of disorganization which they have undergone, Desruelles
and Wallace prefer opening the abscess with caustic ; the sur-
face of the skin is to be destroyed by the potassa fusa, or other
appropriate escharotic to theproposed extent, and the next day a

1 See the principles inculcated by Ricord, p. 595, and by Dr. Wallace,
pp. 360-1.

2 Ces bubons — veritables puits artesiens. (Ricord.)

3 Wallace, op. cit. p. 361.



132



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



puncture made with the lancet in the centre of the slough thus
formed. Where, however,itisprobablethattheintegumentsmay
be saved, the nitrate of silver is to be rubbed " on the surface of
the bubo, and of the surrounding diseased skin, previously
moistened with tepid water, untd the cuticle is rendered of a
blueish colour to the extent of an inch beyond the diseased in-
teguments covering the tumour." On the following day a
puncture is to be made in the thinnest part of the integuments,
and a compress and roller are to be applied. When the surface
of the cuticle has become dry after the first application of the
caustic, it may be reapplied over the integuments as before.
This local treatment recommended by Dr. Wallace almost uni-
versally succeeds in causing the sides of abscess to agglutinate
and the external wound to heal. 1
Ulcerated 233. The open or ulcerated bubo may assume many morbid
bubo, conditions which prevent its cicatrization. In the first place,
the inflammation which sympathy, or the absorption of the
venereal poison, has occasioned in the glands of the groin,
and which has terminated in suppuration, may continue to be
violent after the pus has been evacuated ; and hence, one ob-
stacle to the cicatrization of the ulcer is a degree of inflamma-
tion in the part itself. This undue excitement results either
from a continuance of the original inflammation, kept up by
exercise of the diseased part, by too nourishing a diet or other
causes, or from the imprudent and too early local application
of stimulating dressings. In this form of the disease the
patient will derive benefit from repose, low diet, gentle
aperients, local bleeding, anodyne fomentations, and the
application of compresses soaked in an aqueous solution of
opium. The opiate, or simple cerates, are the most appro-
priate dressings ; and these may be assisted by gentle pres-
sure, by means of compresses and a roller methodically
applied.

Sloughing 234. Again, the surface of the open bubo is commonly
bubo. covered with a thick slough, the ulcer itself is indolent, or



1 Wallace, pp. 377-8.



BUBO.



133



disposed to spread, and its edges are red, angry, and elevated.
This is the most ordinary condition of the true virulent bubo :
and all that has been said on the ulcerating stage of chancres
is applicable here. It becomes necessary, in these states, to
destroy the diseased surface of the sore by means of caustics;
and for this purpose the nitrate of silver, the mineral acids,
the acid nitrate of mercury, or the powder of cantharides
may be employed ; the latter remedy is largely employed by
Ricord. The dressings best suited to this form of bubo are
Ricord's aromatic wine, with or without opium or tannin ; this,
as in the case of chancre, may be alternated with some diges-
tive ointment, 1 solutions of the sulphate of copper or zinc, or
a weak solution of the chlorides of lirne or soda. Creosote
is also very useful as a local application, more or less diluted.

235. In chronic open indolent bubo, with a foul surface, Chronic

where most remedies have faded in modifying the condition of indolent

. bubo.

the sore, M. Cullerier employs occasionally, as a caustic, three,
four, or five grains of the bichloride of mercury dusted over
the surface of the sore, and suffered to remain for some hours.
The application of the remedy is followed by severe pain, and
inflammation, but generally succeeds in producing a healthy
condition of the sore, speeddy followed by complete cicatriza-
tion. 2

236. The alternate applications of leeches and digestive
ointments are exceeding efficacious in the treatment of ulce-
rated bubo. Desruelles states that he generally succeeds in
healing these ulcers, in thirty or thirty-five days, by applying
from four to six leeches every three or four days, and

1 The reader will find the particular forms for the preparation of these
remedies, in the previous pages of this work, under the article Primary
Venereal Sores.

2 This practice originated with Dr. Ordinaire. He first employed it in
the treatment of cancerous or foul sores of the rectum, nose, and other
parts. The results of the method were so favorable, that Cullerier tried
it at the Hopital des Veneriennes in the treatment of foul indolent bubo.
It has in many cases exceeded his most sanguine expectations.



134



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



dressings in the intervals with compresses soaked in a so-
lution of opium. The indications, however, of all local ap-
plications are to be sought for in the condition of the sore ;
they require constantly to be changed j what is useful to-day
may be injurious to-morrow.
Condition ^37. A formidable obstacle to the cicatrization of an open
of the inte- bubo is occasionally presented by the edges of the sore itself.
thTedges* • r * Le integuments covering the cavity have lost part of their
of the ul- vitality, they are more or less discoloured, indolent, or indu-'
rated, and offer no disposition to adhere to the under surface
of the sore, or to throw up granulations by which the ulcer
might be filled. In this condition they offer a permanent ob-
stacle to cicatrization, and it becomes necessary to adopt
means to bring about their union with the subjacent parts, or
else to remove them altogether by the knife, scissors, or
caustic. To accomplish the first intention, the under surface
of the integuments may be rubbed with the sulphate of copper,
the nitrate of sdver, or some other caustic, the cavity of the
ulcer filled with soft lint, covered with some dressing suited
to the condition of the sore, and a bandage and compress
applied.

Removal of 238. When it becomes necessaiy to remove the floating
portions of portions of integument, caustics or the knife may be used, but
raent. U ~ ^hi& operation must not be performed on a truly venereal bubo
in a state of ulceration, inflammation, or great irritability.
These conditions must be subdued before such an operation is
thought of. The late Dr. Wallace thought that the removal
of the diseased integuments covering an open bubo might in
most instances be prevented "by the vesication of the diseased
integuments, and also of the sound skin for a little way beyond
them by means of the nitrate of sdver." The application of
the caustic is to be renewed every four or five days, or as often
as the surface of the integuments to which it might have been
applied becomes covered by a new cuticle. It will also be
useful to apply it occasionally to the whole ulcerating surface,
and to the orifices of any fistulous openings that may exist,



BUBO.



135



not with a view of destroying exuberant granulations, but to
excite the granulating surface to more healthy actions. 1

239. Dr. Wallace states that he has known loose portions
of integument of several inches in diameter, which were so
diseased in their structure that they lay on the surface of the
ulcer like a dead flap, saved by this process. " I have also,"
continues this author, " accomplished the cicatrization of
other ulcerations, which presented numerous fistulous openings
or detached flaps, and in which all the ordinary means, such
as injections, compresses, incisions, &c. had all been employed
in vain. In short, I can most confidently recommend this
treatment of indolent and atonic ulceration, &c. as well as
that of abscesses of the same class, as a very great improve-
ment in the general practice of surgery.

240. The internal surface of the open bubo is rarely smooth, internal
uniform, or continuous; it is generally uneven and irregular, surf * c ^
frequently divided into compartments, or presenting numerous
orifices which are the openings to other glands, which have
suppurated, and thus open by small orifices into the chief or
general cavity, which is very commonly an abscess in the
cellular tissue surrounding the gland or glands, which have

been originally the seat of irritation. It is this pathologic
condition of open bubo which renders the treatment so diffi-
cult and tedious.

241. Injections may be employed in the treatment of these Treatment
fistulous openings with a view of modifying the condition of of sinuses,
their surfaces, and disposing them to cicatrize. Solutions of

the sulphate of copper, the nitrate of sflver, the sulphate of
zinc, or bichloride of mercury 2 may be thus employed.

1 See Wallace, op. cit. p. 381.

2 R. Cupri sulph. gr. vj.

Aquae dest., Jj. M.
R. Argent, nit., gr. vj.

Aquae, Jj. M.
R. Zinci sulph., gr. x.

Aqua?, 5J. M.
R. Hyd. bichlorid., gr. j.

Aquas, 3J. M.



136



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



242. If local bleedings, appropriate dressings, and com-
pression fail in the treatment of these fistuhe or sinuses, it
may be necessary to lay them open with the knife. Some-
times the enlargement of the orifice is sufficient, or it may be
necessary to divide them in their whole length, or if the situ-
ation of the sinus permit, a counter-opening will generally
answer all the purposes of complete incision, a practice at-
tended with much terror and pain to the patient. Cullerier
speaks highly of counter-openings made with the caustic pot-
ash ; the caustic as well as the opening may contribute to the
cure in these cases. The fistula? may likewise be cauterized
internally by means of solid nitrate of silver, or a small por-
tion of the powdered bichloride of mercury introduced by
means of a grooved director: this practice is painful, but
generally successful in its results. Lastly, the whole external
skin, corresponding to the sinuses, may be vesicated with the
nitrate of silver, in the manner recommended for the treatment
of loose portions of integument.

243. The internal use of iodine alone or combined with
potass or mercury, is of great service in the treatment of
chronic ulcerated bubo. To the consideration of the employ-
ment of this remedy I shall return when treating of the con-
stitutional forms of syphilis.

244. Many causes will predispose a patient with a primary
venereal sore to the occurrence of bubo, Amongst these may

occurrence be mentioned a bad habit of body at the time of contracting
of bubo, i n f ec tion, a previous disposition to glandular enlargements,

a scrofulous constitution or taint, full or high living, with
errors or irregularities in diet ; such predisposing causes may
be termed general. There are others which we may denomi-
nate special, such are the long continuance of the primary
ulcer in an indolent or ulcerating condition, the use of stimu-
lating or irritating dressings, much exercise either on horse-
back or foot, and the absence of the suspensory bandage.

It is of vast importance to prevent the suppuration of a
bubo, since matter once formed and evacuated is often suc-
ceeded by sinuses and troublesome ulcers, which are exceed -



Iodine in
chronic
ulcerated
bubo.



Causes
which fa-
vour the



BUBO.



137



ingly tedious and difficult to cure. In hospital practice we
can commonly succeed in dispersing a bubo, because we can
make the patient do as we choose ; but in private practice,
where concealment is necessary, it becomes a more serious
matter.

245 . When, as a consequence of a primary venereal ulcer not Premoni-

yet healed, or iust healed, we perceive enlargement with tender- t01 T s y m P
. , . , . f™, , ° . „ toms and

ness m the groin producing stillness when the patient walks, we their treat

may be sure that a bubo is about to form. I would not re- merit,
commend the old-fashioned practice of applying leeches ; it is
a practice generally very unsatisfactory, rendering the cure
long, uncertain, and tedious ; we must insist upon a strict re-
gimen on the part of the patient, and absolute rest, if pos-
sible. The part may be smeared thickly over with mercurial
ointment, over this a linseed or a bread poultice, cold, and a
piece of oiled silk to keep it moist, confining all by a bandage.
Pressure may also be made by the emp. ammoniaci c. hydrarg.
spread on thick wash leather, the plaster to be placed length-
ways parallel to the thigh, and not at right angles with it ;
this prevents the plaster getting displaced when the patient
walks. The best means of all, however, is to paint over the
enlarged gland night and morning with a strong solution of
iodine and hydriodate of potash. 1

The effect of this is almost magical. In the intervals of
the dressings pressure should be made by a pad and bandage.
If the patient has not used mercury for the treatment of the
primary sore, the dispersion of the bubo will be hastened by
now administering it so as gently to affect the system,
always presupposing that the patient is in a condition to bear
mercury.

Should these means not succeed (which in a majority of in-
stances they will), and suppuration appears inevitable, it must
be hastened by warm poultices and fomentations.

1 R. Iodinii, 9j.

Potass, hydriodatis, 9ij.
Aquae, Jj. M.



138



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



Treatment
when mat-
ter has
formed.



How a bu
bo should
be punc-
tured.



When matter is ready to be discharged, a question of very
great importance suggests itself, viz. how should this be done?
Many surgeons open the abscess freely with the bistoury or
lancet, whilst some prefer the potassa fusa for this purpose.
I would not under ordinary circumstances recommend either
of these methods.

246. When a bubo is ready to puncture, I would not advise
a free incision ; for almost under every circumstance where
this is practised, there is a quantity of integument in the
edges, which will not unite with the granulating surface of the
sore thus produced. By opening an abscess in this way the
whole anterior wall of it is destroyed, and the cure must be
performed by the cicatrization of a granulating surface which
springs from the floor or posterior wall of the abscess. The
great object is to evacuate the matter first, then to diminish
the disposition to its re-formation, and lastly to procure union
of the two sides of the cavity. This may generally be done in
the way I have adopted in the treatment of chronic abscesses
in the Queen's Hospital, and which has been so successful in
a great many instances. When a bubo is ready to be opened,
we should not suffer the skin to become too tbin, but make
several very small punctures over its thinnest part, perhaps six,
eight, or ten, through these the matter will ooze out till the
cavity of the abscess is empty. Through one of the punctures
the point of a very small glass syringe may be introduced,
and a very weak solution of the sulphate of zinc injected, in
the proportions of two or three grains to the half pint of water.
When the abscess is quite empty, place over it a large com-
press of lint, and use moderately tight pressure by means of a
roller. In many instances, if we can keep the patient quiet
for twenty-four hours, we get either partial or total adhesion
of the sides of the bubo, and a speedy cure will be the result;
in other instances this may not be the case, but by the daily
use of the injection through one of the punctures, wbich should
be kept open for that purpose, we succeed in a few days, in
almost every case, in effecting a cure.



BUBO.



139



I generally employ for an injection in these cases the weak Injections
solution of sulphate of zinc. I have used also a weak solution u °^_ 0 e
of iodine and hydriodate of potass. 1

The injections must be varied in strength to suit the feelings
of the patient, or a gentle warmth and slight irritation should
be experienced, but violent pain on no account produced.
Solutions of the sulphate or acetate of copper, alum, port
wine with tannin, may all be txsed ; and if one does not suc-
ceed quickly we should have recourse to another.

This is the best way of treating a suppurating bubo with
which I am acquainted. I hope soon to lay before the pro-
fession generally a memoir on the treatment of chronic ab-
scesses, after a similar manner.

After the numerous instances we have seen of foul, exten-
sive, burrowing sores, in the hospital, which have been pro-
duced solely by laying buboes freely open, which sores have
been for months in existence, we must be quite aware that
some improvement is necessary in this branch of surgery.
Ulcers, the result of bubo, with thick, hard, cartdaginous
edges, have been treated in the hospital by destroying the
edges and the surface with the potassa cum calce. Sinuses,
resulting from the same cause, have been laid open and their
edges destroyed in this way ; and in many cases, I may say in
all, for I do not know of a fadure, the cure, although com-
paratively tedious, has been satisfactory.

1 Iodiuii, gr. iv.
Potass, hydriodate, gr. viij.
Aquae, gviij.

M. ft. injectio.



140



CHAPTER XIII.

OF CONSTITUTIONAL OR SECONDARY SYPHILIS.'

247. I now pass to the consideration of constitutional or
secondary syphilis, consisting of a class of morbid actions which
make their appearance in the economy at a shorter or later
period after a primary venereal sore upon the genitals or else-
where ; the secondary symptoms not being confined to the or-
gans of generation, but extending to the skin, mucous mem-
branes, or other parts.
The phases 248. The phases of syphilis have been divided into the pri-
of syphilis, mary, the secondary, and the tertiary. The primary symptom
secondary, or chancre is due to the direct application of the venereal
tertiary. poison by means of sexual intercourse, or inoculation. It is
capable of propagation, from one individual to another, by
intercourse or inoculation. It is not capable of being trans-
mitted hereditarily ; a female having a chancre at the period
of parturition may produce in this manner the same disease in
her infant. The chancre may be followed by a series of symp-
toms which are successive or continuous, but not constitu-
tional or secondary ; these are new chancres, buboes, or
abscesses, &c. of various kinds, these being in their onset
purely local, and not dependent upon any affection of the con-
stitution generally.

«*

1 Syphilis constitutionnelle ; accidents secondairesettertiaires. (Ricord.)
Maladies veneriennes consecutives. (Desruelles.)



SECONDARY SYPHILIS.



141



249. Secondary symptoms are those which make their ap- Secondary
pearance after the economy has become generally affected by symptoms,
the venereal poison, by absorption from the primary sore,

during which process the matter has undergone modifications
which, in some measure, change its character. Secondary sy-
philitic diseases generally appeal 1 on the skin, or mucous mem-
branes in the eyes, or the testicles, &c. Constitutional syphilis
rarely makes its appearance before the second week after
infection, more commonly later, towards the fourth or fifth
weeks, or at periods still more remote.

250. When syphilis has continued in the economy for an
indefinite period of time, we observe the symptoms which are
termed secondary to disappear, or to lose the properties which
at first characterized them, whilst others of a different kind
succeed, to which has been applied the term of " tertiary."
The tertiary symptoms appear at an indefinite, and generally
very long period, after the primary diseases, and in the
greater number of subjects, either after secondary symptoms
have disappeared, or whilst these are still manifest in the
constitution. The diseases which Eicord terms tertiary
are deep-seated diseases of the skin, and affections of the
bones, as periostosis, exostosis, caries, necrosis. To these
may be added various internal affections, as yet neither well
known, or described. M. Ricord has presented to the Royal
Academy of Medicine specimens of tubercles of the brain,
which he believes to be of syphilitic origin. The tertiary
symptoms are not hereditary, under any specific form of ve-
nereal affection. 1 The children of persons thus affected are
very commonly scrofulous, phthisical, or predisposed to can-
cerous diseases.

25 1 . All the forms of constitutional syphilis must be pre-
ceded by a primary affection, unless the disease be the result



1 Many of the constitutional forms of disease are capable of propagatii
by contact or inoculation, and in persons cohabiting as man and wife,
secondary or tertiary symptom existing in one, is very commonly pr
duced in the other, in precisely the same form.



142



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



of hereditary taint, they then make their appearance with those
symptoms -which are generally termed secondary.
Prevention 252. It may be naturally inquired here, whether any treat-
of second- men t 0 f primary disease can certainlyprevent the secondary.
toms. SymP " This question has also been agitated by Ricord. This author
states, that he has not been able to meet with any recorded
fact where a primary venereal sore healed in five days, has
been followed by secondary symptoms ; neither has he ever
observed such a circumstance in his own practice. The pro-
bability of secondary symptoms is in direct proportion to the
duration of the primary disease, the longer this continues
the greater is the chance that the constitution may become af-
feeted ; hence, that treatment is the best prophylactic under
which the sore most rapidly heals, without induration of its
cicatrix.

All persons 253 - A11 persons are not equally susceptible of a constitu-
not equally tional infection from a primary sore. The risk of secondary
susceptible symptoms is ma terially diminished, where the primary sore
has been treated by mercury. This fact is admitted by all
authors practically conversant with the subject. Those indi-
viduals' are most likely to suffer from constitutional syphilis
whose general health is bad when they contract a primary
sore ; hence, chronic affections of the skin, stomach, or di-
gestive organs, scroftda, general cachexy, or other diseases
general or particular, under which the patient may labour at
the time of infection, are to be considered as predisposing
causes. Attention to the general health is of the first im-
portance, and the constitution of our patient must most ma-
terially modify our treatment.

254. Secondary syphilis, like primary, only becomes for-
midable by neglect and ill-treatment ; it is a principle we
should never lose sight of, to commence seriously the treat-
ment of constitutional syphilis the moment it becomes mani-
fest in the economy. There is no contra-indication to the
immediate commencement of this treatment ; should the con-
stitution be bad, or the patient diseased, it must be modified
to suit these circumstances : even the period of gestation is no



SECONDARY SYPHILIS.



143



bar to the anti-syphilitic treatment. M. Ricord states that he
has seen more females miscarry when their disease has been
suffered to go on unchecked, than when they have been sub-
jected to an anti-syphilitic treatment, framed with judgment,
to suit the circumstances of the case. The same remarks ap-
ply to the period of suckling.

255. When constitutional syphilis is complicated, these Complica-
comphcations shoidd never be neglected ; if they coexist with tion s-
acute or subacute affections of internal organs, the latter ought

first to be attended to ; these shoidd be subdued before we
commence the anti-syphilitic treatment. When scrofula, affec-
tions of the skin, or chronic diseases of internal organs, com-
plicate constitutional syphilis, the anti-syphilitic treatment
may be at once commenced, but it must be framed and con-
ducted with much care, that the accompanying affection, of
whatever character it may be, may not be aggravated by it.
An exclusive, or empirical treatment, cannot be too strongly
condemned. It is in these cases that the compounds of iodine
and mercury, iodine and iron, and iodine and potass, are com-
monly so useful. 1

256. Whenever any of the forms of constitutional syphilis General
are accompanied by fever, or much inflammation, a strict an- treatment,
tiphlogistic treatment and regimen are absolutely necessary.
Without a rigorous observance of this rule we can have no ra-
tional hope of success. Whatever be the character of the
constitutional symptoms, if they are accompanied by local in-
flammation, or general excitement, a rigorous antiphlogistic
regimen and treatment ought to be followed till the vascular
excitement is subdued. An antiphlogistic treatment is not to

be adopted where these phenomena are absent, and of course
its employment as a general measure is to be severely con-
demned, for in many cachectic or scrofulous patients, or those

1 See the whole of the excellent remarks of M. Ricord on Complicated
Constitutional Syphilis, op. cit. pp. 615-18.

" En un mot, l'accident le plus saUlant, l'epiphenomene, quel qu'il soit
est celui qu'il faut d'abord combattre, sans negliger aucun des elemens qui
peuvent fournir aim indications therapeutiques."



144



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



whose constitutions are already undermined by chronic dis-
ease, an opposite plan of treatment becomes necessary. In
the latter instances, a full, nutritious diet, is essential to
the success of the treatment. The practice of the Hos-
pital has taught us that debilitated and scrofulous patients,
who have been badly fed, quickly recover their general health,
and are cured of syphilis under the full diet of the hospital ;
whilst those whose circumstances have enabled them to live
well, frequently become cachectic under the hospital regula-
tions ; their syphilitic affections remain stationary, and they
only recover their health, and lose their disease, in returning
to the habits of living to which they have been accustomed.

257. That the internal treatment adopted against any par-
ticular form of constitutional syphilis may have every chance
of success, it is also necessary that the stomach and bowels be
kept entirely free from all irritation or disease.



145



CHAPTER XIV.

OF THE SYPHILIDA. SYPHILITIC DISEASES OF THE SKIN.

258. Syphilitic diseases of the skin may be referred to eight
principal groups : 1, Exanthemata; 2, Squamae; 3, Vesiculae;
4, Pustulae ; 5, Papulae ; 6, Tubercula ; 7, Ulcers of various
kinds and in various situations ; many the consequences or
necessary result of many of the preceding forms ; and 8, Vege-
tations, warts, condylomata, or mucous tubercles.

OF THE SYPHILITIC EXANTHEMATA. 1

259. The syphihtic exanthemata generally make their ap-
pearance under the form of irregular patches, of a shining copper
or bronze colour, at the onset of the disease ; if there be much
accompanying fever they are more inclined to redness, and the
bronze or copper colour is not marked till the inflammation
and fever have disappeared. Occasionally this form of disease
commences in red patches, spread more or less extensively
over the body ; these patches vary in dimensions from the size
of a sixpence to that of a shilling, they are not elevated and
solid like the papulae, and have no apex or centre containing
either lymph or pus. They are commonly accompanied by
fever, and but for the coexistence or immediate precedence of
primary sores might be mistaken for an eruption dependent

1 Synonyms and Varieties. Roseola Syphilitica, and papulous erythema :
(Cazenave on the Syphilida. p. 226.)



146



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



upon other causes. They very commonly appear hefore the
primary symptoms have disappeared. When they are dying
the top is commonly covered with a thin dry scurf or scale.
They are sometimes accompanied by papulae and other forms
of constitutional syphilis, as " Iritis," and superficial redness
or ulceration of the fauces, and are frequently succeeded
by the squamous or tuberculous forms of disease. These
eruptions frequently accompany the primary forms of syphilis.

260. They demand, in the first instance, if there be much
symptomatic fever, an antiphlogistic treatment, and the warm
bath; afterwards, if they are rebellious, the iodide, biniodide, or
bichloride of mercury with sudorifics may be employed with
the mercurial vapour-bath. The syrup of Larrey is used by
Biett as one of the most efficacious remedies in this form of
the syphilida, alone, or given in some decoction of the woods.
Ricord's favorite decoction of Feltz may be here employed. 1

OF THE SYPHILITIC SQUAMiE.

261. The squamae are particles of thickened epidermis, be-
come hard, dull, and opake, and elevated above the surround-
ing skin by a morbid condition of the subjacent dermis, or
simply, of the rete mucosum. This disease is essentially
chronic, and does not generally succeed to any febrile condi-
tion of the economy. The syphilitic squamae generally appear



1 THE DECOCTION OF FELTZ.

R. Rad. sarsaparillae, ^iij-
Gummi acacise, ^ss.
Antimonii sulphuret. Jiv.
The sarsaparilla is to be boiled in six pints of water, over a slow fire,
till it is reduced to one half. The sulphuret of antimony is to be wrapped
in a piece of linen, and suspended in the middle of the decoction, without
touching the sides of the vessel. M. Ricord prefers this to the other
decoctions of the woods.



SYPHILITIC SQUAMiE.



147



in the form of patches, more or less diffused, varying from the
size of a sixpence to that of a half-crown ; the centre of these
patches is frequently depressed, they are of a red copper colour,
changing ultimately to a dull brown, or even black, which is
a long time in disappearing.

262. The syphilitic squamse have a tendency to excoriate,
or ulcerate slightly in the centre, which then becomes covered
by a small, dry, thick crust ; occasionally, also, their surface
is traversed by fissures, when there does not exist any apparent
ulceration. After the cure of the disease, the dermis remains
depressed in the parts corresponding to the centre of the
squamous patches. The other symptoms of constitutional
syphilis, with which the squamse are commonly associated, are
inflammations and ulcerations of the fauces and palate, iritis,
pains and diseases of the periosteum and bones.

263. As the syphilitic squamse are not generally accom-
panied by vascular excitement or fever, an antiphlogistic
treatment is rarely indicated. Sudorifics, as the decoction of
sarsaparilla, or the preparations of Zittman or Feltz, with the
carbonate of ammonia, and the mercurial vapour-bath are
generally successful. The bicyanide or iodide of mercury,
or the syrup of Larrey, are the best remedies when mer-
curials are indicated. The preparations of arsenic are
useful in these forms of disease, particularly when they suc-
ceed to primary diseases which have been fully treated by
mercury. Biett relates a case of this character speedily cured
by the liquor arsenicalis, and the arseniate of soda, after the
failure of other measures. The iodide of potassium may like-
wise be used, but to this remedy we shall return in a subse-
quent section.



OF THE SYPHILITIC VESICULiE.

264. The vesiculre are the most rare of all the syphilida.
M. Biett has only seen a few examples of it. In one case,
well observed, the disease was characterized by vesicles seated



148



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



upon an inflamed base, of a deep copper-coloured red ; they
were indolent, and remained stationary much longer than
eruptions of the same character, not having a venereal origin.
Some of them shrunk up, and were transformed into gray
squamous crusts ; others disappeared, but left behind them
on the skin where they were situated, a brown mark. They
were accompanied by some degree of fever, inflammation of
the fauces and palate, and an ulcer of suspicious character.
Ultimately, the patient became covered with a pustular sy-
philitic eruption. I have seen one well-marked case of this
disease, in a patient in the Queen's Hospital. The vesicles
were seated in clusters on a reddish brown base. They coin-
cided with a pustular eruption on other parts of the body, and
a sloughing ulcer of the fauces.

265. The treatment best adapted to these forms of disease,
is an antiphlogistic one ; the mercurial vapour-bath, and sudo-
rifics. A mercurial course will rarely be required.



OE THE SYPHILITIC PUSTULjE.

266. The pustuke are characterized by an elevation of the
epidermis, raised by a collection of pus secreted by a circum-
scribed portion of inflamed skin. The syphilitic pustulae are
frequently complicated with tubercles, and the pustules them-
selves commonly placed upon a tuberculous base. The pus-
tides are again occasionally associated with papulae, but are
rarely complicated either with squamous, or exanthematous
affections. The syphilitic pustulae frequently ulcerate, and
give place to a sore of characteristic appearance, with hard
and elevated edges, and afoul surface, secreting a sanious pus.
Unlike other pustular diseases of the skin, the syphilitic
pustule follows no regular course ; they are developed slowly,
and remain stationary for a longer or shorter period, frequently
for many weeks, or till an appropriate treatment be adopted.
They are situated upon a hard raised base, of a deep brown
or copper red ; this colour is better marked when they have



•



SYPHILITIC PUSTULE.



149



continued some time, than in the commencement of disease.
The syphilitic pustulse strictly belong to that class of affections
which are termed secondary, but are sometimes observed to
coexist with a primary venereal sore ; they are, under these
circumstances, developed upon the skin of the penis, the
scrotum, the pubes, or the labia ; they are placed upon a red
indurated base, soon burst, and change into ulcerations, having
all the character of chancres.

267. The syphditic pustulse form two distinct groups. The
first is composed of pustules termed psydracice, by Willan ;
and, by Alibert, miliary syphilitic pustules. They are small,
numerous, arranged in groups, and disposed to become con-
fluent ; each pustide is placed upon a hard base, of deep red,
or copper colour, and resembles an opaque white point, which,
when opened, presents a small gray-coloured excavation.
These excavations ulcerate slowly, or cicatrize, leaving a de-
pressed cicatrix on the skin, of a copper, or brown colour, or
covered with a thin incrustation.

268. To the pustules composing the second group the term
phlyzacise is applied. Wfllan has grouped them under the
generic appellation of syphilitic ecthyma. The phlyzaceous
pustules, or the pustules of syphditic ecthyma, are formed
separately and distinctly upon the skin ; not in groups as in
the former variety ; they are placed upon a hard, thickened,
conical base, surrounded by a deep red, brown, or copper-
coloured areola. They commonly ulcerate, and are succeeded
by sores, with thick, elevated edges, dug out as it were from
the surrounding parts ; these ulcers secrete an offensive pus,
or become covered with thick crusts ; they have a tendency to
spread, or to remain stationary, and not to cicatrize or assume
any heading process, unless an appropriate treatment be re-
sorted to. Sometimes these ulcerations give origin to red,
fungous, painful vegetations. The crusts with which they are
occasionally covered, are hard, brown, or black, and not
yellow, as those which cover the surfaces of broken pustules
generally.

269. The rupture of the syphilitic pustule, and the incrus-



150



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



tation of the pus upon the sore thus produced, gives rise to a
peculiar form of disease, which Alibert has described as the
"crustaceous pustular syphilide ;" but this, it will be per-
ceived, is not a distinct or separate form of disease, but merely
the consequence of the breaking of the pustule, and the drying
up of the pus upon the sore, or ulcer, which is thus formed.
The affection is now characterized by a very thick, and very
hard crust, most frequently of a conical shape, covering an
excavated ulcer, possessing all the characters, both on its base
and edges, of a venereal sore. These ulcers sometimes pene-
trate very deeply, destroying the periosteum, and ultimately
producing disease in the bones, over which they are situated.
They now enter into the class of tertiary symptoms. Should
the ulcer heal under the crusts, it leaves behind it a cicatrix
of a copper colour, deeply depressed in the skin.

270. The syphilitic pustulse are amongst the most formi-
dable of the forms of constitutional syphilis, the crusts and
ulceration which succeed to the pustules frequently being so
extensive as to cover the entire face, or the greater portion of
the body. The constitutional disturbance is, in these instances,
so great, as frequently to terminate fatally. The records of
St. Louis furnish numerous examples of this kind.

271. The treatment of the pustular forms of constitutional
syphilis must be varied to suit the period of the disease, and
the particular condition of the eruption, and the state of the
constitution which accompanies it. In the former, accom-
panied by much inflammation or irritation, an antiphlogistic
treatment is at first to be adopted ; low diet, the warm bath,
either alone, or medicated with gelatin, or anodynes, as the
decoctions of poppy, marsh-mallows, henbane, or opiates.
The vapour-bath is also useful, and mercurial fumigations,
when the affection is perfectly chronic. At this period, also,
mercurials may be given internally ; the preparations most
useful, are the iodide, the bicyanide, and the syrup of Baron
Larrey.

272. When the patient's health is more or less undermined
by the pain and irritation of an extensive pustular eruption,



SYPHILITIC PAPULAE.



151



all specific treatment must be abandoned till the general health
is improved ; he must be put upon the use of mild tonics, and
a generous diet, and the pain of the eruption must be allayed
by opiates given internally, or applied locally. Opiates are of
great use in all diseases of this kind, particularly where the
general health is impaired, and much irritation present. Many
patients in the wards of St. Louis have recovered from diseases
of this character by their use alone.

273. When mercurials fail, as they occasionally will, the
iodide of potassium, or the preparations of arsenic may be
employed. If the pustules are large, painful, and ulcerated,
they should be dressed with aqueous solutions of opium, the
opiate cerate, or a lotion of hydrocyanic acid, in the propor-
tions of ten, twelve, or fifteen drops to the ounce of water.
When the ulcers are perfectly chronic and indolent, the ointment
of the iodide of mercury should be used. Of all remedies in the
pustular forms of disease none equal the mercurial vapour bath.
I have seen eruptions cured in a few weeks by this, which had
for months resisted all the usual remedies.

274. The various local remedies mentioned in the chapter
on Primary Sores may be used to the secondary ulcers suc-
ceeding pustules according to the aspect they assume. They
may be washed with weak solutions of chloride of lime, and
then dusted with calomel, or with calomel and opium.

OF THE SYPHILITIC PAPULiE.

275. The papulae are small, solid, hard elevations upon the
skin, containing neither lymph nor pus, surrounded by a small
inflamed areola, having frequently ulcerations at their apices,
which then become covered with small, dry incrustations. The
syphilitic papulae are more or less disseminated over the body,
arranged in groups, or disposed to be confluent. They are
distinguished by then deep red, or copper colour, their ten-
dency to ulcerate, and to form hard incrustations on then-
surfaces, which, falling off when the ulcer has healed, leave
brown, copper-coloured, depressed cicatrices in the skin. The



152



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



papulae are commonly associated with pustules, tubercles, or
squamae ; and almost always accompany syphilitic iritis, ulcers
of the mouth and fauces, diseases of the bones, or periosteum,
nocturnal pains, and other symptoms of confirmed constitu-
tional syphilis. This affection of the skin sometimes accom-
panies primary symptoms ; when it does so, it assumes a more
or less acute form, and is attended with some fever.

276. This variety of disease has been termed venereal itch,
" scabies venerea," on account of the irritation the papulse
occasion : when they are seated on certain parts of the body. It
sometimes attacks the labia, principally on their external sur-
face, the orifice of the vagina, and the clitoris, which parts, on
examination, are found covered with small papulae of a deep
red colour, causing an intolerable itching, principally in the
night; the eruption sometimes extends to the arms and in-
ternal parts of the thighs. Mercurial ointment generally
allays the irritation.

277. The practitioner must be careful in his diagnosis of
this disease, to distinguish it from the common prurigo, which
so frequently distresses pregnant females, which is symptomatic
of some uterine affection, or consequent upon suppression of
the menstrual discharge.

278. If the papulse assume an acute, or subacute form,
they must be treated, at first, on the antiphlogistic plan, and
a regulated diet must be observed. Should they succeed to
primary symptoms, which have not been treated by mercury,
this remedy may be employed : fumigations have a marked
effect in allaying the irritation by which they are accompanied;
weak solutions of the bichloride of mercury may likewise be
used, to sponge the surface of the skin affected with sypbilitic
papulee. The mercurial vapour bath is also of essential
service.



SYPHILITIC TUBERCULA.



153



OP THE SYPHILITIC TUBERCULA.

279. Syphilitic tubercles of the skin are deep seated, solid,
circumscribed elevations, containing neither lymph nor pus,
they differ from the papulae in their size, being much larger,
more prominent, and better denned. Syphditic tubercles are
either isolated or grouped, of a sinning red, livid, or brown
colour, surrounded by an areola of a dark red or coppery ap-
pearance. These tubercles are prone to become ulcerated, and
form excavated sores with thick and elevated edges, and a foul
surface, secreting an offensive pus, which, drying up, is trans-
formed into gray or dark coloured scabs or crusts. The
syphilitic tubercle forms the link of connexion between the
secondary and tertiary symptoms of M. Ricord ; it is the first
of that class of syphilitic diseases, in which the virus appears
to have penetrated more deeply into the economy, and to have
produced a disorganization in tissues, which those forms hi-
therto considered have left untouched.

280. The flat tubercle of M. Cullerier, or the tuberculous
pustule of Alibert, sometimes occurs as a primitive affection,
but more commonly as a symptom of constitutional syphilis ;
in the former instance it is observed on the scrotum, the labia,
the vicinity of the anus, or the mammae. The surface of
these tubercles is smooth and fiat, of a deep red or copper
colour, varying from the size of a sixpence to that of a s hilli ng ;
they are not so much disposed to ulcerate as the other varieties.

281. The more common forms of tubercle are conical, or
round elevations, dispersed here and there over the skin, or
assembled in groups or clusters, which are also irregularly
distributed. The size of these varies from that of a pea to
that of a large hazel nut, or filbert ; they are more commonly
situated on the anterior surface of the chest, or the abdomen,
on the neck, or the internal part of the arms.

282. Another variety of tubercle is situated, more com-
monly, on the ahe or lobide of the nose, or on the forehead ;
frequently, also, upon the neck of the uterus, or upon the

7§



154



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



tongue, where they may be mistaken for cancerous affections.
These tubercles are commonly assembled in circular groups of
variable size ; they are so prone to ulcerate, that this termi-
nation appears to be one of their natural characters ; when in
this condition, they are frequently described under the name
of syphilitic lupus. The tubercular syphilida are commonly
complicated with a scrofulous, scorbutic, or herpetic tendency,
or diathesis ; their progress is slow, and generally without
pain ; they gradually increase in size till they terminate in
softening or ulceration. They are the most formidable of all
the forms of constitutional syphilis, producing great deformity
in all the parts invaded by ulceration, and exceedingly difficult
to cure.

283. Whilst the tubercles are in a state of induration, and
as yet neither ulcerated or softened, their resolution may be
attempted. For this purpose, the iodide of mercury, with the
iodide of potassium may be employed; it must be remem-
bered, however, before any plan of treatment is framed, that
due attention be paid to the general health of the patient.

284. If there be no contra-indication, the treatment is com-
menced by administering a pill of the iodide of mercury
daily, containing one grain of the salt combined with conium,
or opium, 1 and the solution of the iodide of potassium, 2 at first
administered in doses of ten grains in the day. On the fifth
day, two pills are given, and the quantity of the iodide of
potassium is increased ; it is generally unnecessary to carry
the dose of mercury to any extent, or to continue its use very
long ; the treatment is to be completed by the iodide of po-
tassium. The indurated tubercle is commonly resolved by
this treatment, leaving behind it, in the skin, merely a depres-
sion of a brown or copper colour, more or less deep.

285. The mercurial vapour bath is also exceedingly useful,

1 R. Hyd. iodidi, gr. j.

Ext. conii, gr. v. vel,

Pulv. opii, gr. ss. M. ft. pil. o. n. sumend.
1 See the chapter on the use of Iodine and its Preparations, in Consti-
tutional Syphilis.



SYPHILITIC TUBEHCULA.



155



whilst the tubercles are yet unsoftened, in procuring their re-
solution ; it may be employed with the iodide of potassium,
and sarsaparilla.

286. As syphilitic tubercles are accompanied by a pro-
cess of inflammation, under the increase of which they soften
and ulcerate, a local treatment, whilst they are in a state of
induration, is of vast service in assisting the internal treatment
in their resolution. For this purpose, cooling lotions may be
employed, or fomentations of poppy, or henbane, aqueous
solutions of opium, poultices, and leeches applied at a little
distance from the base of the tubercle.

287. When the inflammation is subdued, and the tubercles
are indolent, folds of linen soaked in a weak solution of the
bichloride, 1 or frictions with mercurial honey, 2 or the oint-
ment of the iodide should be used. They may also be
sponged with a lotion composed of the solution of chloride of
lime, and afterwards rubbed with an ointment made of calomel,
or calomel and opium. Ricord gives one golden rule here
which, in attempting to resolve the tubercular syphilide, we
should bear constantly in mind : that, as long as inflammation
exists, a local antiphlogistic treatment should be pursued,
whatever, according to the constitution of the patient, the in-
ternal treatment may be. The local applications above indi-
cated are only to be employed in a perfectly indolent condition
of the disease.

288. In the ulcerated forms of tubercles, all that has been
said on the treatment of primary venereal sores may be re-
ferred to with advantage, since these secondary ulcerations
require nearly the same local treatment, — the use of the nitrate
of silver, the aromatic wine, with astringents, sedatives, nar-
cotics, or digestive ointments, or a local antiphlogistic treat-

1 R. Decocti althese officinalis, 0 j.

Hydrargyri bichlorid. gr. xviij. M. (Biett.)

2 MERCURIAL HONEY.

R. Hydrargyri chlorid. 3j.
Mellis opt. gj. M.



156



SYPMLITIC DISEASES.



ment according to the aspect of the sore. When caustics are
indicated, the surface of the ulcers may be touched with the
acid nitrate of mercury : this is a favourite remedy at St. Louis,
and the ulcers cicatrize rapidly under its application ; the se-
paration of the crusts or eschars may be facilitated by the warm
or mercurial vapour bath.

289. The iodide of potassium is the favorite remedy with
M. Ricord during the ulcerated stages of tubercle ; mercurials
also may be used, particularly if the primary disease have not
been treated by mercury ; the iodide, the bicyanide, or the
syrup of Larrey are the best remedies. The decoctions of
Feltz or Zittman, the liquor arisenicalis or the arseniate of
soda are also remedies which, in particular cases, may be em-
ployed with advantage. If the disease do not appear to amend
under the use of one remedy, another should be resorted to,
and in this manner it will sometimes be found necessary to
try several before one is discovered suited to the constitution
of the patient. Sometimes the preparations of arsenic succeed
when all the rest have failed, occasionally one form of mercurial
when another has been unsuccessful. There are cases, happily
rare ones, in which all medicines appear useless : it is better,
under these circumstances, to omit them altogether for a time,
to remove the patient to a fresh atmosphere, to watch his
general health carefully, and then again to resume the treat-
ment, after the lapse of a longer or shorter period.



157



CHAPTER XV.

CONSTITUTIONAL SYPHILITIC ULCERATION OF MUCOUS
MEMBRANES.

290. Secondary or constitutional syphilitic ulcerations of
mucous membranes are extremely common. They may be
seated in all parts of the mouth, upon the tonsils, on the
posterior part of the pharynx, in all parts of the nasal fossae,
at the orifice of the glottis, and even in the larynx itself.

291. The mouth is frequently the seat of superficial ulcer- Syphilitic
ations, sometimes seated upon the tongue, upon the pillars of affections
the fauces, the inner surface of the hps, and other parts, mouth.
Sometimes these ulcerations resemble ordinary aphthse, again

there is a distinct loss of substance surrounded by an inflamed
margin, and, at other times, it appears as though a pencil
dipped in a strong solution of nitrate of silver had been drawn
over the tongue. These ulcerations generally, if not always,
occur in persons who have taken mercury for the cure of some
venereal symptom. They are not under the control of any
specific treatment, but generally improve under a regulated
diet, general treatment, and frequent gargles, more particularly
those in wbich tannin forms an ingredient. 1 In most instances
they are extremely diflicult to cure ; and are almost invariably
rendered worse by mercury.

' R. Tannin, 9j.

Spiritus vini Gallici, Jij.
Aqua rosac, 3yj. M. ft. gargarisma.
R. Tinctura? myrrh, Jj.

Mellis cuprati, Jss. M.
The ulcers to be touched with this liniment night and morning.



158



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



Sections 292 ' s yP hilitic vlcers of tlie tlir oat, pharynx, and

of the fauces, appear under several forms.

throat. 1st. The deep excavated ulcer of the tonsil, covered with an

ash-coloured slough, and surrounded by a deep, livid, red
condition of the mucous membrane. This ulcer, though ge-
nerally seated between the pillars of the fauces, is sometimes
seen on the uvula. This is the true venereal sore throat of
Hunter, and English surgeons generally ; and, unless the
remedy be specially contra-indicated, requires a full mercurial
course for its cure. It may occur with other symptoms of
constitutional syphilis, and very frequently is found to be
associated with persistent induration of the cicatrix of a re-
cently-healed chancre.

2d. Creeping superficial ulcers, found on the uvula, fauces,
and pharynx.

3d. Sloughing ulcers extending rapidly down the fauces,
covered with white tenacious sloughs. These may extend
over the whole of the pharynx ; they resemble precisely pha-
gedsena in other parts.

4th. Deep, livid redness of the arch of the palate, fauces, and
throat, occurring with various forms of the syphilida, or soon
after the healing of a primary sore. These ulcers, &c. may occur
with or without different forms of cutaneous eruption, pains
in the head and limbs, loss of hair, and other forms of consti-
tutional infection : also with the most varied conditions of the
general health.

The treatment of the venereal ulcers of the throat resolves
itself into local and constitutional. To the first variety local
treatment is hardly beneficial, and against it, unless specially
contra-indicated, as I have already said, a full mercurial
course should be directed, the best mode being by inunction,
employing at the same time the mercurial vapour-bath.
Local 293. Local treatment of all the other forms is very impor-

treatrnent. tant> fj ne u i cers should from time to time be pencilled over
with one of the liquid caustics already recommended in the
treatment of the primary ulcer ; such as the acid nitrate of
mercury, the acid nitrate of silver, or nitric acid. In the



ULCERATION OP MUCOUS MEMBRANES. 159

intervals of these applications gargles of various kinds are
very useful. I have found the oxymel seruginis one of the
best of these. 1 With this local treatment, should be associated
whatever constitutional treatment the nature of the case may
point out, and here so various are the conditions that it is
impossible to lay down any fixed rules. Should mercury be
used, and how ? This will depend upon the nature of the
primary sore ; upon the state of the cicatrix ; the form of the
cutaneous eruption, if any be present ; the condition of the
general health ; and the previous treatment. Should there be
a scaly eruption, an indurated cicatrix, and tolerably good
health, mercury may be fully employed with a reasonable hope
of success, according to the general principles inculcated in
this work. It may also be employed as an alterative, under
the form of the iodide, should its full employ be contra-
indicated, and other treatments fail.

294. Where mercury is contra-indicated, I would mention
as remedies likely to be of service ; — the mercurial vapour-bath,
the cold infusion of sarsaparilla in lime water, and full doses
of opium ; with the mineral acids, guaiacum, or the hydriodate
of potass.

1 R. Oxymel aeruginis, Jij.

Aquee fontanse, Jvj. M. ft. gargarisma.



160



CHAPTER XVI.

OF SYPHILITIC DISEASES OF THE NOSTRILS AND NASAL FOSSjE.

295. Primary venereal sores may unquestionably be pro-
duced in the nostrils by the direct application of the virus ;
these instances are, however, rare, and must be the result of
accidental inoculation by means of the instruments, sponges,
or linen used to cleanse sores on other parts. Constitutional
or secondary syphilitic affections of the nostrils, are by no
means uncommon. They generally appear under one of the
following forms. In the first they are characterized by chronic
inflammation of the pituitary membrane, with an alteration in
the character of its secretions, the latter being offensive, pro-
fuse, and commonly tinged with blood. In the second form,
we find ulcerations of varied character and appearance ; and
again, discharges of vast quantities of hard, discoloured, and
offensive crusts, seemingly of dried mucus, without any altera-
tion in the appearance of the mucous membrane of the nostrils,
at least so far as this can be seen, though these discharges
may probably depend on chronic inflammation of the mem-
brane lining the upper meati of the nose. In the latter form
there is also a marked alteration in the character of the voice.
Symptoms. 296. These diseases often commence with the symptoms of
ordinary cold ; the nose is dry and uncomfortable, and the
voice slightly hoarse ; the symptoms, however, do not yield to
ordinary treatment, and to this dryness ultimately succeeds
discharge of fetid muco-pus, and blood, and hard crusts of
inspissated mucus, or ulceration.



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



161



297. In some instances these symptoms connected with the
nose are the only ones that mark a constitutional syphilitic
taint, at other times various other symptoms are present.

C. H., aged 34, was admitted under my care into the Case.
Queen's Hospital, in May 1843. His symptoms consisted in
the discharge from the nostrils of very large dry crusts of in-
spissated mucus, having something the shape of portions of
the spongy bones of the nose. The mucous membrane of the
nose, generally, was dry and tumid, and the voice hoarse and
unpleasant. He had some suspicious copper-coloured blotches
on different parts of the body, and admitted that, a short time
before, he had had sores upon the genitals, but nothing specific
could be collected as to the manner in which the primary
disease had been treated. He was ordered the iodide of mer-
cury in half-grain doses, which was continued for some weeks,
tenderness of the gums being produced and kept up. He also
injected the black wash into the nostrils several times a day.
The treatment was completely successful.

This is a good example of the commencement of that form
of syphilitic disease of the nostrils which ultimately terminates
in disease and destruction of the spongy and proper bones of
the nose.



162



CHAPTER XVII.

OF SYPHILITIC ULCERATION OF THE LARYNX.

298. One of the most formidable varieties of constitutional
syphilis is ulceration of the mucous membrane, of the glottis,
and larynx. Of this form of disease I have unhappily seen
several examples ; and modern writers on venereal diseases,
more particularly Mr. Carmichael and M. Cazenave have re-
ported others. Syphilitic ulceration of the larynx generally
follows or accompanies other simdar diseases of the nasal
fossse, throat, or pharynx, or various forms of the syphilida ;
it does not commonly occur as a solitary symptom of consti-
tutional syphilis, and consequently we are the less likely to be
deceived as to its true character.

299. The symptoms are an alteration in the character of the
voice ; it becomes hoarse, husky, or totally lost ; the patient
expectorates a fetid pus, and portions of slough mixed with
blood ; the thyroid cartilage is sometimes enlarged, and there
is considerable tenderness Tvhen the larynx is examined with
the fingers. In this condition the patient is generally much
emaciated, and night perspirations are present. These symp-
toms closely resemble those of laryngeal phthisis, and even
ordinary phthisis pulmonalis ; from the former disease syphi-
litic ulceration of the larynx is to be distinguished by the pre-
cedence of primary, or other constitutional symptoms of sy-
philis, or by the coexistence of the latter. The stethoscope
will hardly suffer us to mistake this disease for ordinary pul-
monary consumption ; indeed the almost invariable existence



ULCERATION OP THE LARYNX.



163



of other forms of constitutional syphilis with ulceration of the
larynx, will, in most instances, clear up any douht as to the
true nature ef the latter.

J. M'K— was admitted under my care first as a home, and Case,
afterwards, as an in-patient of the Queen's Hospital. He had
been suffering for two years from a chronic pustulo-crustaceous
disease of the skin, and a large ulcer in a sloughy condition
occupied the whole of the pharynx. He was much emaciated,
had constant cough, expectorated an offensive bloody niuco-
pus, and could not speak above a whisper. Auscultation de-
tected no disease of the lungs. The constitutional symptoms
of syphilis had been preceded by chancres of the glans penis
and urethra, the latter of which was not healed. He under-
went a variety of treatment with little benefit, and ultimately
died of extreme exhaustion. The inner surface of the larynx
was destroyed for a great extent by an ulcer, precisely re-
sembling that which occupied the pharynx, and a series of
creeping ulcers extended down the urethra nearly to the neck
of the bladder.

300. M. Cazenave has recorded some cases of syphilitic Treatment
ulceration of the larynx cured by the iodide of mercury ; in ^ e ^ ntly
all the cases that I have seen I have found the disease diffi- ava y
cult to manage, and very frequently fatal. Mr. Carmichael
has experienced the same difficulty, and has proposed to
lessen it by performing tracheotomy. " If the ulcer is in the
larynx, there can be little hope of inducing it to heal, on ac-
count of the constant current of air through this passage,
and the frequent motion to which it is subjected, as the chief
organ of voice. I have, however, in many instances, passed
into it with decided advantage, a long bent probe, or metallic
bougie, covered with lint, moistened in a solution of nitrate of
silver, of from six to ten grains to the ounce of distilled water.
In the act of passing the bougie, thus armed, into the la-
rynx, the patient should be desired to project the tongue as
far as possible from the mouth, which prevents the epiglottis
from closing the aperture of the larynx, but in the great ma-
jority of cases, I must confess that nothing more than mere



164



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



temporary alleviation was obtained by this or any other mea-
sure I have seen tried, with the exception of tracheotomy.
The other measures to which I allude, are mercurial fumiga-
tions, mercury internally exhibited, and blisters, moxa, tartar-
emetic ointment, caustic issues, and setons to the integuments
covering the larynx." 1

1 Carmichael's Clinical Lectures on Venereal Diseases, pp. 141-2.
Dublin, 1842.



10 ft



CHAPTER XVIII.

OF SYPHILITIC WARTS, EXCRESCENCES, VEGETATIONS,
CONDYLOMATA, OR MUCOUS TUBERCLES.

301. Vegetations, excrescences, or warts of varied form and General
appearance upon the skin or edges of the mucous membranes, descri P tio
constitute the last variety of syphilitic diseases of the skin.

These excrescences appear on the skin or muco-cutaneous sur-
faces of the male and female organs of generation, both in the
primary and secondary forms of syphilis. They are variable in
appearance and consistency, sometimes resembling common
warts on other parts of the integument, and at others, pre-
senting a surface so fibrous, or granulated, that they have
. been supposed to resemble the root of the leek or the surface
of the raspberry. These fungi, excrescences, warts, or vege-
tations, by all which names they are indiscriminately known,
grow from the surfaces of the skin in the immediate vicinity
of the organs of generation, or from the under surface of the
prepuce, and from the glans penis in the male ; and in the
female from the labia majora, the nymphse, or the entrance
of the vagina itself, which they sometimes entirely surround.

302. These warts or excrescences arise from several causes. Causes.
In the first instance, they are commonly produced by the irri-
tation excited by the gonorrhoeal discharge on the common
integument in the vicinity of the organs of generation, and

they are commonly produced by the same discharge on what

are termed the muco-cutaneous surfaces of these organs (by

the muco-cutaneous surfaces I mean those where the skin and Situation.

mucous membranes insensibly blend into each other). On

the pure mucous surface itself the warts are rare, though they



166



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



forms.



may be sometimes found in the orifice of the urethra, or at the
entrance to the vagina, as happened in a recent case, where
the orifice of the vagina only was studded with a number
of small hard elevations, which were doubtless warts in their
incipient state. Warts, then, are caused, in the first instance,
Primary by the irritation produced on the common integument, or the
muco-cutaneous surfaces of the organs of generation, by the
irritation of pure gonorrhceal discharges. They are caused,
secondly, by superficial forms of irritations, excoriation, or
ulceration of a venereal character, seated on the surfaces to
which I have just alluded. These are most common in the
male, and are situated on the glans penis itself, more com-
monly round the corona glandis, or on the under surface of
the prepuce, these being properly muco-cutaneous surfaces.

303. In the third instance, they arise from the surfaces or
primary venereal sores themselves, from chancres or ulcers
during the period of cicatrization, and most commonly this
takes place when venereal ulcers are treated on the simple or
non- mercurial plan. In such cases, more particularly when
the patient is suffered to follow his customary avocations during
the treatment of the primary syphilitic sore, the latter heals
slowly and with difficulty, occasionally remaining stationary
for many days together, and showing neither disposition to
heal or spread, although its surface may be covered with
healthy granulations. In such cases, when the sore does
not close, instead of skinning over or cicatrizing in the
usual manner of an ordinary ulcer, the surface assumes a
hardened character and begins to grow or throw up this
hardened substance, which ultimately assumes the aspect of a
wart or vegetation. In this way is the third variety of vene-
real excrescences produced.

304. All the varieties of warts that I have as yet described
belong to the different forms of primary syphilis. Vegetations
or warts, however, are commonly met with as symptoms of
constitutional syphilis, and they are then termed condylo-
mata. The secondary forms of syphilis, on some occasions,
strongly resemble the primary forms ; and hence it is, that,



Constitu
tional
forms.



WARTS, EXCRESCENCES, ETC.



167



although the varieties of which we have just spoken are
produced, like all the other forms of primary syphilis, hy
the direct application of the venereal poison, they present a
striking resemblance to certain excrescences, or fungous
growths, commonly denominated condylomata, which result
from the contamination of the system. "However, with
proper attention, primary condylomata can easily be distin-
guished from secondary condylomata ; for the latter are uni-
formly accompanied or preceded by other symptoms which
point out constitutional disease, and particularly by a very
slight scaly or rubeoloid eruption, either with or without a
superficial affection of the mucous membrane of the mouth
and fauces." 1

305. The secondary condylomata are not always accompa- Differential .
nied by affections of the skin or throat, but " they appear as diagnosis,
a distinct symptom of constitutional syphilis in advanced pe-
riods of the disease." It is of the first importance to distin-
guish between these two varieties : — viz. the primary and con-
stitutional, since the treatment suited to the one is not admis-
sible in the other. The first varieties are generally purely
local, and may be cured by local means ; the second are con-
stitutional, and require a general treatment for their eradica-
tion. In forming our judgment as to their true character, we
must be guided by the history of the case, the preceding and
accompanying symptoms, and the appearances of the disease
itself. " They are not so hard as primary warts ; they are
more of a fleshy nature, more tender, and more apt to bleed.
They have a more uniform surface ; and instead of being formed
of a number of smaller warts connected together they are
composed of one uniform mass. They do not approach so near
the verge of the anus as primary warty excrescences generally
do, being for the most part of the greatest extent, and most
elevated near the tuberosity of the ischium. In some cases
they become idcerated, and discharge a great deal of very
offensive matter ; for the most part the ulceration which takes



1 Wallace, pp. 388-9.



168



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



place being superficial, and not reaching below tbe surface.
Lilce the other symptoms of constitutional syphilis, these ex-
crescences either continue in the same state, or become gra-
dually worse, as long as no remedy is employed constitutionally
for the cure of the disease. 1

306. Venereal warts, excrescences, or condylomata, arise on
cutaneous, muco-cutaneous, or mucous surfaces, though more
rarely on the latter —

1st. From the irritation there produced by purely gonor-
rhoea! discharges.

2d. From superficial ulceration or excoriation of a purely
venereal character.

3d. From the cicatrices of excavated ulcers.

4th. As a symptom of constitutional or secondary syphilis ;
the first three kinds belonging to the different forms of pri-
mary syphilis.

" "Whatever tends to excite the flow of an unusual quantity
of blood to tbe penis, seems to create a disposition in these
parts to the formation of warts. Irritation produced on the
prepuce and glans, as we have seen, by a variety of causes,
disposes the small blood-vessels of the part to sprout or
pullulate, by which these warty excrescences appear to be
formed." (Bell, vol. i., p. 414.)

" We have mentioned irritation as a cause of these excres-
cences, but it is only the slighter kinds of it that seem to
produce them. They often succeed to a slight degree of in-
flammation, but never form on parts highly inflamed ; on the
contrary, much inflammation destroys the tendency in these
parts to the formation of warts, insomuch that our most effec-
tual remedies in the cure of warts, and for preventing a return
of them, are such as always excite a good deal of pain and
inflammation." (Bell, vol. i., pp. 416, 417.)

1 B. Bell on Gonorrhoea Virulenta and Lues Venerea, vol. ii, pp. 125,
126, 127.

The secondary forms of condylomata are termed hy the French vrriters
mucous tubercles, mucous papulae; they differ in nothing from the descrip-
tion I have already given except in the name.



WARTS, EXCRESCENCES, ETC.



169



307. The surface of these fungi or vegetations frequently Contagious
secretes a puriform discharge, and this discharge has a power cnaracter -
of propagating "a disease similar to that which produced it."
(Wallace, p. 335.)

In proof of this assertion, I shall bring forward a case which
Sir A. Cooper used to relate in his lectures. "A gentleman
in Sussex was called to attend a lady in labour ; he felt some-
thing in the vagina which appeared unintelligible, and on ex-
amination found it to be a crop of warts. He delivered her,
but did not say anything about the warts to the lady. In
conversation with the husband, he told him that his lady had
a number of warts. The gentleman stated, that at the time
he was married he had a wart on the penis, and he had no
doubt that he had communicated them to his wife." (Cooper's
Lectures, p. 497.) This case shows that warts occasionally,
though the circumstance is rare, spring from a purely mucous
surface; it proves also, beyond a doubt, their contagious
character.

It is asserted by some authors, though denied by others,
that all the varieties of syphilis are infectious ; and Dr. Wallace
more particularly asserts that each has a disposition to pro-
duce its like. " We have a remarkable proof of this assertion
in the effects occasionally resulting from the application of
matter secreted by these fungi ; for although they may have
been caused by poison derived from an excavated ulcer, their
secretions, as we have seen, will most generally produce vege-
tations of their own kind." (Wallace, p. 335.)

308. These warts, or primary excrescences, grow in many Pathology,
instances from the epidermis, their attachment being so slight,
that on being removed the cutis vera is left entire. In other
cases they proceed from the skin itself; they have not been
observed to go deeper than this. (Bell, vol. i., p. 413.)
Hunter seemed to entertain the idea that generally they are
produced from the surface of the cutis vera. This corre-
sponds pretty much with the opinion of Dr. Wallace, who
believes that these vegetations have sometimes their origin in

8



170



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



the papillary body covering the cutis vera, and sometimes in
the rete mucosum itself.
Treatment. 309. We now come to speak of the treatment of vegetations ;

and here it will be necessary to recollect what has been said
with regard to the divisions of these affections into the primary
and secondary forms. The primary forms, being generally
purely local diseases, are in most instances to be removed by
a treatment purely local; the secondary, resulting from a
poisoned or infected constitution, as generally require a con-
stitutional or general treatment for their cure.
Of the pri- 310. The primary forms of warty venereal excrescences are
niary forms generally to be cured without great difficulty by local appli-
cations or means, either by the knife or the application of
escharotic or irritating remedies. Hunter says, " They are so
little of the true animal, and so much of the disease, that many
trifling circumstances will make them decay ; an inflammation
in the natural and sound parts round the wart wdl give it a
disposition to decay ; many stimuli applied to the surface will
often make them die. Electricity will produce action in them
which they are unable to support ; an inflammation is excited
round them, and they drop off." (Hunter, p. 268.) These
are the principles which are to guide us in the treatment of
these forms of disease; the application of remedies which,
producing irritation and inflammation in the surrounding in.
tegument, dispose the wart, in which the vital actions are very
feeble, to drop off. The knife or ligature may be resorted to
where the apex of the wart is large, and the base pedunculated
or narrow. Where the base is broad, and its attachments to
the skin extensive, it is better to trust to the remedies already
mentioned, which we shall presently pass in review more par-
ticularly. Hunter mentions as escharotic remedies the nitrate
of silver and the sulphate of copper ; as stimulants, a mixture
of equal parts of the acetate of copper and the powder of
savine leaves. When the knife or ligature are used, it is
always advisable to touch the cut surface with some
caustic.



WARTS, EXCRESCENCES, ETC.



171



311. In the more ordinary cases these excrescences may Local
generally be removed by bathing them and the contiguous treatment -
parts several times a day with a strong solution of the muriate
of ammonia or the bichloride of mercury. 1 With these appli-
cations the warts may be sponged freely several times a day,
till as much irritation and inflammation are excited in the sur-
rounding parts as the patient can reasonably bear. In mild
and recent cases these remedies will generally accomplish a
cure. When the surfaces of the warts are hard, if they are of
long standing, or do not yield to the remedies already men-
tioned, it becomes necessary to employ escharotics and irritants
of a more powerful character. When such are used, the parts
" should be merely moistened with a pencil dipped in them,
nor should this be repeated above once in two or three days."
Amongst these stronger preparations are solutions of the ar-
gentum vivum in pure nitric acid, one ounce of the former in
two ounces of the latter ; the tincture of cantharides and the
liquor potassse arsenitis are useful employed in this way.
Arsenic was a favourite remedy with Sir E. Cooper in the
destruction of warts. He employed an ointment composed of
one drachm of the oxide of arsenic (arsenious acid) to one
ounce of spermaceti ointment or lard, the surface of the warts
to be smeared with it frequently, according to circumstances.
Powders which, when dusted over the warts and integument
in then- neighbourhood, irritate and inflame the latter, are
generally more efficacious than solutions of the same sub-
stances. Amongst these may be mentioned equal parts of
the savine powder and chloride of mercury, savine leaves
powdered and corrosive sublimate, and the hydrargyri nitrico-



1 Ammonias hydrochlor.
Aceti destill.
Aquae, aa gij. M.

Hydrarg. bicliloridi, Jss.
Sp. vim, sj.
Aqua;, 5iij. M.



1/2 SYPHILITIC DISEASES.

oxydum. 1 We may also use for this purpose equal parts of
the dried or burnt alum, and the nitric oxide of mercury.
" After these warts have been removed, by local irritants or
by the knife, it will be necessary to use some astringent lotion,
to restore tone to the capillaries of the diseased surfaces, and
to remove any excoriation or catarrh which may have co-
existed with the fungous growths." ("Wallace, p. 337.)
Use of 312. "We may now inquire whether these vegetations, which
irciuy. are t j ie conse q Uence) as we h ave seen, of some forms of purely
syphilitic diseases, require mercury for their cure, or for the
prevention of their return, since in many instances they are
very Liable to do so. Mercury is unquestionably not required
for the removal of the first form of venereal warts which are
produced by the irritation of gonorrhceal discbarges. Nor do
we conceive it can ever be required for the cure and preven-
tion of the second variety, which we have stated to be the
result of venereal excoriations. In the treatment of the third
variety it is possible that mercury may be occasionally re-
quired. The last form of vegetation, which springs from the
surface of the excavated ulcer, rarely occurs where mercury
has in the first instance been judiciously used for the cure of
the primary ulcer. We must bear in mind, then, that a pri-
mary venereal ulcer for which mercury is judiciously employed,
is less likely "to heal into a wart" than when such remedy
has not been employed.

In ordinary and long-standing cases of vegetations which
are the result of venereal sores, mercury will not be required,
and we must in most instances trust to local remedies only.
Hunter and Bell express themselves strongly on this point.
"These excrescences (says the former) are considered by many
not as simply a consequence of the venereal poison, but as
possessed of its specific disposition, and therefore they have



1 Pulv. sabinae.
Hyd. bichloridi.
Hyd. nit. oxydi, 5a oiij. M.



WAKTS, EXCRESCENCES, ETC.



173



recourse to mercury for the cure of them ; and it is asserted
that such treatment often removes them. Such an effect of
mercury I have never seen, although given in such quantities
as to cure in thesame personrecent chancres." (Hunter, p. 268.)

313. The latter says, " The warts which succeed to chancres
commonly remain equally firm and obstinate after mercury
has been given as they were before, and are to be removed by
the same means as if the constitution had never been diseased.
This is a point which, in a particular manner, merits attention,
for whilst the opinion is retained of warts on these parts being,
in most instances, connected with a constitutional syphilis,
much mischief is apt to be done by a great deal of mercury
being given where no advantage can ever ensue from it. In
the treatment of warts I have known the constitution almost
ruined by one course of mercury after another, without any
effect upon the excrescences, which were afterwards easily and
speedily removed by remedies applied directly to the parts
themselves." (B. Bell, pp. 415, 416, vol. 1.)

In the very recent state, where they spring from the surface
of an ulcer which has been treated without mercury, they may,
in some cases, be removed by the administration of this me-
dicine in the usual way in which it is employed for the cure
of chancres generally ; but this, unquestionably, should not be
done till local remedies have been fully tried, and found to
fail. In the very recent state, then, of fungi springing from
the surface of ulcers treated without mercury, this remedy
may and shoidd be employed if local means fail. If, again,
warts have been removed by the knife, a plan certainly not
generally to be recommended, and the cut surface run into a
foul intractable sore, mercury may be employed for the treat-
ment of such sore, which is, in all probability, specific. In
all other instances of primary warts mercury must be abstained
from, since not the least probable benefit is to be expected
from its employ.

314. The treatment of the secondary forms of venereal ex- Treatment
crescences is to be conducted on principles totally different of second -
from those which guided us in the management of the primary ^ iorms -



174



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



forms. Here local treatment is comparatively of little use,
and constitutional or general treatment is most to be depended
on. When, then, we are fully satisfied, from the history of
the patient, the appearance of the disease itself, and the pre-
ceding or accompanying symptoms, that we are called to treat a
case of this nature, if there exist no special contra-indications
in the constitution or state of the patient at the time he is pre-
sented to us, we should lose no time in submitting bim to a
mercurial course under the rules wbich ought generally to
guide us in the administration of this drug. The mercurial
vapour-bath may also be employed with great benefit, and the
condylomata touched with Plenck's solution. 1

1 R. Alcoholis.

Acidi acetici, aa 3SS.
Hyd. bichloridi.
Aluminis.
Camphors.

Plumbi carbonatis, aa 5ss.
M. Verruca? aut condylomata penicillo hoc liquore madido semel vel
bis de die tangantur.



175



CHAPTER XIX.

OF THE SYPHILITIC TESTICLE.

315. This disease, termed also syphilitic sarcocele, occa-
sionally appears as a secondary symptom of constitutional
syphilis : it is clearly to be distinguished from that affection
of the testicle which succeeds to gonorrhoea, as well as from
sarcocele depending upon other causes not syphilitic. It is
most frequently associated with other secondary diseases, as
the syphilida, iritis, &c. When the testicle is affected, it
gradually enlarges, becomes hard and heavy, and generally
presents an uneven surface to the touch ; the induration may
also exist in the spermatic cord or epididymis.

316. Eicord most prudently observes, that in all the dis-
eases of the testicles, which appear of a doubtful character,
we must be extremely cautious in recommending amputation
of the part. Dupuytren, in cases of this character, submitted
his patients to a general mercurial treatment, and by this plan
saved an immense number of testicles.

317. The internal treatment of the venereal testicle con-
sists in a modified mercurial course, or the use of the iodide
of potassium. Cullerier highly extols the latter remedy, and
was very successful in its employ. The local treatment may
be pretty much the same as that recommended for the gonor-
rhceal testicle, viz. local bleeding, fomentations, lotions, ano-
dyne and mercurial friction, and when quite indolent, strap-
ping with mercurial and ammoniacum plaster, or the plaster
" de Vigo."



176



CHAPTER XX.

SYPHILITIC DISEASES OF THE PERIOSTEUM AND BONES.
(OSTITIS, PERIOSTITIS, CARIES, NOCTURNAL PAINS.)

Nodes. 318. Those enlargements of the bones, termed nodes, ap-
pertain to the natural history of the progress of syphilis, if
suffered to go on unchecked by remedies. Nodes arise as a
consequence of primary venereal ulcers, when the disease has
become constitutional from the absorption of the poison, and
the poison has penetrated very deeply into the system. The
bones are amongst the last organs to be affected by the vene-
real poison ; hence, Hunter places them amongst the second
order' of parts affected in constitutional syphilis, and Ricord
ranks them amongst his tertiary symptoms, in which, says he,
the syphilitic virus is completely transformed. " It might be
said (says M. Ricord) that in the secondary forms of consti-
tutional syphilis, the virulent cause — i. e. the poison still
exists unchanged ; but in the tertiary symptoms, amongst
which we place the 'venereal node,' it is completely trans-
formed." We may naturally here inquire whether mercury
has anything to do with the production of nodes. I confess
that I am disposed to think that a great deal of mischief is due
occasionally to a mercurial course. " It is a fact," says Mr.
Carmichael, (Clinical Lectures on Syphilis, p. 10,) "that in
those cases of syphilis treated without mercury, the secondary
symptoms are particularly mild, and the bones are seldom or
never affected." Yet Mr. Carmichael admits the occurrence
of diseases of the bones as proper to the natural history of



THE PERIOSTEUM AND BONES.



177



constitutional syphilis, succeeding to three out of the four
kinds into which he divides primary venereal sores. 1

319. On the other hand, M. Ricord thinks that peculiarity of Causes,
constitution, particularly the lymphatic temperament, a system
depressed hy dissipation, poverty, insufficient clothing, expo-
sure to damp, &c. predispose to the occurrence of such forms
of disease.

The treatment of the primary and secondary symptoms
certainly has an influence over the occurrence or non-occurrence
of the tertiary; "hence (says Kicord— Acton on Venereal
Diseases, p. 390), daily experience proves that if secondary
symptoms he treated without mercury, tertiary symptoms wdl
frequently follow, and that even when mercury is employed
at the early period of the occurrence of secondary symptoms,
the appearance of tertiary symptoms cannot be prevented ; in
such cases, however, provided the mercury has been used ju-
diciously, they will be slight." (Acton, 390-1.) It does not
follow that secondary symptoms should always precede the
occurrence of tertiary, though in most cases they do. In
many instances the disease passes on from the first order of
parts affected to the third, without the intervention of any
disease belonging to the secondary order. Thus I have seen
sores on the genitals, and bubo (the first order of parts), fol-
lowed by nodes on the forehead, and on the shafts of the long

1 Exposure to cold, whilst suffering from other forms of syphilis, or
when using, or after having used, mercury, are considered by many writers
as the chief causes of these forms of diseases of the hones. These diseases
are also much less frequent in hot countries than cold, and in those places
where a systematic simple treatment without mercury is followed. They
are said to be rare in Sweden, Denmark, Hamburgh, and Vienna, where
such treatment is adopted. On the other hand, such diseases of the bones
are unknown, except syphilis have existed in the constitution, though they
are more frequent, perhaps, when mercury has been given for its cure if
the patient be of bad habit of body, and exposed to cold during its admi-
nistration. The same remarks will hold good with regard to syphilitic
iritis. Yet these diseases, the latter more especially, are, in many instances,
only to be cured by mercury.

8§



178



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



bones (third order) ; but no disease of the second order of parts,
no secondary symptoms properly so called.

320. " The rarest cases that we meet with are those which
succeed to primary sores treated by mercury, when, after ex-
posure to cold, from disease, or some exciting cause, tertiary
symptoms declare themselves at first under a slight form, but
successively increasing in severity." (Acton, 391.) In such
cases we have a disease to contend with which, in the language
of John Hunter, is compounded of syphilis, mercury, and the
constitution. It must at once be evident that the treatment
in such a case cannot in any way be specific.
Pathology. 321. Nodes, as they are commonly termed, result from an
effusion or deposit between the periosteum and bone, the re-
sult of inflammation affecting one or both of these parts. Very
commonly they are dependent upon a superficial inflammation
of the bone itself. These effusions between the periosteum
and bone may consist of serum, pus, or lymph. Again, nodes
commonly are produced by an effusion of a proper osseous
matter, similar to the provisional callus first thrown out in
cases of recent fracture. Some nodes, very likely, are thus
formed, since they present the feeling of a true enlargement
of the bone itself. This is, most probably, the first effect of
the inflammation of the surface of the bone, and the effusion
of pus and serum are subsequent, supposing the inflammation
to proceed unchecked by remedies.
Termina- 322. Nodes may terminate in a great variety of ways. First,
tions. by resolution i. e. by the subsidence of the inflammation of
the bone and periosteum which produced them, and the ab-
sorption of the fluids or matter effused. In other instances,
after the node has disappeared, the surface of the bone re-
mains uneven, depressions exist in it, as though a portion
of the bone had been eaten away, which is the case. This
either arises from the pressure exercised by the effusion of the
fluid between the periosteum and bone having produced ab-
sorption, or from the bone having become softened and carious
from inflammation of the bony tissue itself. This mode of
termination we have often seen exemplified where, after the



i



THE PERIOSTEUM AND BONES.



179



disappearance of nodes, the surface of the bone has been found
destroyed to some considerable extent ; this is, no doubt, the
mode in which the appearances witnessed frequently in dis-
eased bones are produced. If the node has suppurated, and
has either burst of itself or been punctured by a lancet, and
the surface of the bone has been exposed, caries commonly
follows to some extent, and the soft parts run into ulcers ex-
ceedingly difficult and sometimes impossible to heal. Ulcers
of this kind, to which every variety of application has been
used at times get nearly well, and then suddenly begin to ul-
cerate again, having thickened edges, not unlike a primary
venereal sore on other parts. In some instances, where osse-
ous matter has been thrown out between the periosteum and
boues, such effusion remains permanent; the inflammation ac-
companying, or dependent upon such state, subsides under
proper treatment, but the deposit of osseous matter remains
permanent, and produces one form of exostosis.

323. It is possible that venereal diseases of the bones and Differential
periosteum, but more particularly inflammation of the latter, diagnosis,
causing effusion between it and the bone, may be mistaken

for or confounded with periostitis arising from other causes,
and more particularly where these are of rheumatic origin and
character.

324. In drawing a differential diagnosis between cases of
rheumatic periostitis and venereal periostitis we should be
guided by the history of the case, and the preceding occurrence
of some of those forms of constitutional syphilis which belong
to secondary symptoms.

325. I am not aware either that periostitis, arising from
causes not venereal, is complicated or succeeded by those
diseases of the bones ending in caries, which we so commonly
notice in the disease when it has a venereal origin. I do not
think that the symptoms immediately preceding the develop-
ment of nodes would enable us to form a very certain diagnosis
of the nature of the affection ; they are both preceded for some
time before the appearance of nodes by nocturnal pains. The
seat of the pains may in some measure guide us. In the



ISO



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



rheumatic forms of disease the pains are situated in the joints
or fleshy parts, as the shoulders ; in those of venereal origin
the pains are more in the shafts of the long bones, particularly
of the radius, ulna, tibia, fibula, and in the bones of the head ;
in the rheumatic forms they sometimes, but rarely, affect the
parts I have mentioned. Venereal nodes are, again, to be
carefully distinguished from that uneven and irregular enlarge-
ment and softening of the surface of the bones, which is de-
pendent upon rickets; the experienced Portal has shown that
some forms of constitutional syphilis are marked by softening
of the bones, without caries or exostosis. The first series
of cases narrated in his Treatise on Rickets refers to ve-
nereal rickets, or rickets traceable to a venereal taint. He
states that this species of disease may produce softening of the
bones without caries ; at other times it produces a peculiar
brittleness.

Prognosis. 326. The prognosis in venereal diseases of the bones and
periosteum is not always favorable. If the health of the pa-
tient be unbroken by previous courses of mercury incautiously
administered, we may hold out hope of recovery with some
degree of certainty ; but if the constitution has been impaired
by poverty, debauchery, bad living, mercury, and syphilis, all
contributing their part to the destruction of the patient, we
have a disease to contend with which will sometimes baffle all
our treatment, however skilfully it may be framed, and how-
ever unweariedly it may be followed out both by practitioner
and patient. At any rate no rash promises must be made as
to certain and speedy amendment, since relapses after partial
restoration are so frequent.

Treatment. 327. This naturally divides itself into constitutional and
local. By the former we endeavour to correct the poisoned
condition of the system from which the local disease had its
origin, and upon which it depends. By the latter we endeavour
to remove the local effects which such a condition of the
system generally has produced.

328. Most of the earlier modern writers on syphilis, from
Hunter downwards, recommend full mercurial courses for the



THE PERIOSTEUM AND BONES.



181



cure of syphilitic diseases of the bones and periosteum, such
as those I have described. Amongst the more prominent of
these writers, I may mention Hunter, Bell, and Swediaur.
The latter says, " AH syphilitic complaints of the bones re-
quire a complete mercurial course, continued longer than for
the affections of the soft parts ; for it is sometimes necessary
to continue the use of mercury for three or four months, in
order to obtain a radical cure." Bell says (p. 239, vol. ii,)
" In every affection of the periosteum and bones, arising from
the syphilitic virus, mercury should be given immediately, for
it is upon this remedy that we chiefly depend." The same
opinions will be found reiterated by all modern writers, from
Hunter downwards, till the therapeutic effects of the hydrio-
date of potass attracted attention in certain forms of consti-
tutional syphilis. We find Sir A. Cooper inculcating the same
line of practice.

329. Venereal diseases of the bones and periosteum we have Compara-
now leamt may, in many instances, be treated by iodine and tive effects
the hydriodate of potass, as successfully as by mercury ; at anrHodinZ
least it becomes our duty, generally speaking, in these affec-
tions, not to have recourse to mercury till we have tried these
medicines and proved their inutility. Venereal nodes, too,
will often return after they have been treated by mercury, and
it then becomes certainly a much more prudent course to try
the effect of the preparation of iodine than to submit the patient
again to mercurial treatment. We may, perhaps, be enabled to
judge from the history of a case which remedy is the most likely
to benefit the patient: I believe it possible to point out the kind
of case in which each might find its suitable application. If a
patient present himself with a true venereal disease of the
bones and periosteum, if the health be tolerably good, and if
the primary or secondary antecedent venereal disease of such
patient have been treated on the simple plan without mercury,
I would recommend at once a mercurial course. He may, it
is true, be cured by the hydriodate of potass, but we shall be
longer about it ; he will not be cured as well, and it will be at
much greater expense of pain to the patient. If, again, in



182



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



such a case, the inflammatory action accompanying the disease
be very acute, the parts very hot and tender to the touch, and
the integument covering the bones itself inflamed, mercury is
still more strongly indicated ; get your patient as quickly as
you can under its influence, not, perhaps, so much with the
view of specifically curing his syphilis, as with the intention
of controlling inflammation by the aid of mercury. We know
how efficacious mercury is in the treatment of many forms of
acute disease, and more particularly when acute inflammation
of this character is the result of a venereal taint. The circum-
stances which are to lead us to select mercury as a remedy in
venereal diseases of the bones and periosteum are, an un-
impaired constitution on the part of the patient, and his pre-
vious syphilitic diseases having been treated on the simple
plan without mercury. Where diseases of the bones and
periosteum occur in patients whose health is either naturally
delicate, or which has been rendered so by protracted venereal
diseases and repeated courses of mercury, I would not advise
mercury. We may, possibly, by having recourse to it under
such circumstances, benefit the patient for a short time, but
the disease is very liable to return, and the constitution will
be very probably utterly destroyed. In a case of this kind,
we may, with every prospect of advantage to the patient, com-
mence the constitutional treatment of the disease by the hydrio-
date of potass in three or five grain doses, three times a day,
in an ounce of cinnamon or peppermint water, the compound
infusion of gentian, or the compound decoction of sarsaparilla.
There commonly exists a preternatural irritabihty in the bowels
of patients who have frequently had recourse to mercurial
courses ; and hence it becomes very necessary to guard against
any ill effects (such as pain or purging) which the hydriodate
of potass may produce ; for this purpose a few minims of the
tincture of capsicum, with or without laudanum, may be added,
according to circumstances, to the vehicle in which the potass
is given. The dose of the hydriodate must be gradually in-
creased from three to five grains every three or four days, till
the disease give way, or some circumstance occur which will



THE PERIOSTEUM AND BONES.



183



prevent us either continuing its employ, or requiring a dimi-
nution in the dose.

330. Almost all the varieties of venereal nodes are, on their
first appearance, tender to the touch ; the first effect of the
hydriodate is a diminution of this tenderness, then diminution
of the node itself, which, in many cases, gradually and entirely
disappears under the use of this salt. If, after the continued
use either of this medicine or mercury for a reasonable length
of time, the node have diminished to a certain point, and there
remains hard and stationary, without tenderness, we are to look
upon this as effused osseous matter, constituting a true exos-
tosis, which is hardly likely to be removed by a further con-
tinuance of medicine.

33 1 . The local treatment of venereal diseases of the bones Local
and periosteum is also of great importance. As many of them fr^ 11161
are ushered in with symptoms of inflammation more or less
acute, an antiphlogistic local treatment, suited to the degree

of inflammation present, should be adopted ; several relays of
leeches shoidd be placed over the node till all tenderness shall
have disappeared ; these are to be succeeded by blisters, which
should be dressed with the stronger mercurial ointment. The
continued application of blisters, even after all constitutional
treatment appears to have lost its effect, will often succeed
in reducing very considerably the size of a venereal node.
Many other remedies may be used, with the view of dispersing
a node when perfectly chronic, i. e. when all symptoms of
inflammation have disappeared ; amongst these may be men-
tioned frictions with mercurial ointment and camphor, the
hydriodate of potass ointment, the application of the tinc-
ture of iodine, or the solution of iodine in the hydriodate of
potass, so generally used, and with such sigual success ;
pressure and strapping with the emp. ammoniaci cum
hydrargyro, which I have so usefully employed in the same way
in venereal affections of the testes, particularly those which
succeed to gonorrhoea. A question of great practical im-
portance remains to be here considered, in reference to the
treatment of collections of fluid which succeed to or accompany



184



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



venereal ostitis and periostitis. If fluctuation be evident in a
tumour of this kind, and no redness or thinness of the integu-
ment have taken place, I do not think any author imprudent
enough to recommend the puncture of such a tumour, with a
view of discharging its contents ; should we do so we are very
likely to produce caries and exfoliation of the bone beneath,
the extent and consequence of which it is impossible to foresee.
Sir A. Cooper mentions the case of a person who died in con-
sequence of exfoliation produced by the opening of nodes on
both his tibiee. In these cases, we are on no account to lay
open these collections of fluid, but by a perseverance in the
constitutional method of treatment, and the repeated applica-
tion of blisters, to endeavour to procure absorption of the fluid
effused. Where the existence of pus is rendered still more
certain by the redness and shining appearance and thinning
of the integument covering the tumour, I cannot follow the
advice of Sir A. Cooper, " to make an incision down to the
bone." I would rather press the importance of the advice
given by Mr. Colles in reference to this point. " Some,"
says Mr. Colles, "have proposed the early opening of the
tumour, and the evacuation of all the contained fluid. To this
proposal I would object, that in some cases this particular
practice is followed by painful suppuration, and by very copious
discharges, and not unfrequently by caries and tedious ex-
foliation of the bone. It seems preferable in all cases to try
the local and constitutional effects of mercury and iodine, and
by means of these to endeavour to avert suppuration and ul-
ceration. This rule should be most strictly adhered to in the
case of nodes on the forehead, or on any exposed part of the
body ; for when a node has been of long standing we often
find that a sort of chronic suppuration is established, the in-
teguments become thin and sometimes red ; at other times
they are reduced to the utmost degree of thinness, and yet
may retain their natural colour, so that the surgeon is actually
tempted to give vent to the fluid by the puncture of a lancet.
Yet if he will but resist the temptation which the very thin
state of the skin offers to him to open it, and will still apply



THE PERIOSTEUM AND BONES.



185



repeated blisters, he will have no reason to lament his for-
bearance ; for as soon as the mercury or hydriodate of potass
comes to act favorably on the system, he will perceive that the
fluid begins to he absorbed, and that this process will finally
be terminated by the adhesion of the skin to the surface of
the bone. From the depressed position of the skin after ad-
hesion has taken place, and the sunken unequal surface which
the bone presents to the touch, we are convinced that an ab-
sorption of the boue has gone on to some depth." 1

332. In such cases, then, it might be well, if much distension
present, not to lay the abscess open with a lancet, but to
puncture with a very fine trocar. This mode of practice will
relieve the distension, and give time for other treatment to be
brought to bear, at the same time the puncture will be so
small that no air can possibly be admitted, the surface of the
bone will not be exposed, and the risk of caries and exfoliation
will certainly not be increased.



1 Colles, p. 187.



166



CHAPTER XXI.

ON THE TKEATMENT OP SYPHILIS IN PKEGNANT WOMEN,
NURSES, AND INFANTS.

333. Syphilis may be communicated from the mother or
nurse to the ovum, foetus in utero, or the infant, in the fol-
lowing ways:

1st. The virus may be transmitted with the semen by co-
habitation during gestation, or at the time of conception. 1

2d. The infant may contract disease during labour, by
coming in contact with parts of the uterus, vagina, labia, &c,
which are the seat of various forms of venereal taint.

3d. The infant may become diseased after birth through
the medium of the milk, &c. the mother or nurse being af-
fected; the breast being the seat of local symptoms or not.

The disease may also be propagated by a diseased child to
a healthy nurse, and the latter may again give it to a healthy
infant, "without," according to Bertin, "the nurse appearing
to be infected."

334. Cullerier, in a Memoir published in 1815, has endea-
voured to lay down some rules to guide us in reference to this
subject.

1st. If the breasts of the nurse and the mouth of the infant
are only, and at the same time, diseased, the question is one of
doubt in which the disease originated. 2d. If the breasts alone
are diseased, and if the infant has symptoms in other parts be-

1 See Bertin (Physician " en chef" of the Venereal Hospital, Paris,)
Traite de la maladie venerienne chez enfants nouveau-nes, les fenimes en-
ceintes, et les nounices. Paris, 1810.



PREGNANT WOMEN, ETC.



187



sides the mouth, it is very probable that the latter has been
the first infected. 3d. If the infant has the mouth alone dis-
eased, and the nurse has other symptoms besides those of the
breast, it is most probable the infant has been diseased by the
nurse : 4th. If the nurse has general constitutional symptoms,
and the infant only local symptoms, the disease probably ori-
ginates with the nurse. 5. If the infant has general consti-
tutional symptoms the disease is most likely hereditary.

This point is not always easy to solve, but the rules given
will be found, in most instances, correct, and are very useful
in guiding us in the formation of a correct diagnosis.

335. Apatient, whose case is already referred to, was admitted Case,
under my care at the Queen's Hospital, suffering from a pustulo-
crustaceous syphilitic disease of the skin of very formidable
character. He was there treated and cured. His wife brought
her infant to me covered with scaly blotches, whdst the hus-
band was in the hospital ; the child was plump and apparently
healthy when born, but a few weeks afterwards these patches
broke out, and the health began to decline. The mother pre.
sented no evidence of disease, and the breasts, as well as the
infant's mouth, were free from idcerations. She was extremely
anxious to be examined, fearing she might be labouring under
some affection of the parts themselves. I instituted the most
careful examination with the speculum, not only once, but
four or five times, and could never discover the least local dis-
ease, either in the vagina, uterus, labia, nymphse, or the folds
of muco-cutaneous membrane surrounding the clitoris, &c. &c.
The child, in this instance, was alone treated, and cured. I
purposely abstained from treating the mother, whom I had
watched for nearly two years. She has never suffered from a
syphilitic symptom in any form.

This appears to have been a case of syphilis in the infant, Remarks,
transmitted by the father to the ovum or foetus in utero ; the
mother never having suffered from disease, and never having
been treated under the suspicion that she was diseased. I
purposely abstained from treating her to see whether syphilis



188 SYPHILITIC DISEASES.

would sooner or later develop itself. Up to the present mo-
ment, two years from the birth of her child, she has remained
perfectly healthy. Mr. Acton introduced to the Medico-
Chirurgical Society, May 13, 1845, a case of similar character.
Case. M. H — , nine weeks old, was placed under Mr. Acton's care,
on account of an eruption, chiefly papular, over the whole body.
The voice was hoarse, and there was slight discharge from the
nose ; the palms of the hands presented a scaly copper-coloured
eruption. The mother stated she married four years ago, be-
came soon afterwards pregnant, and at the full time gave birth
to a dead child. During the following year she miscarried.
On the occurrence of the third pregnancy, the child, the pre-
sent patient, was born at the full time perfectly healthy.
About the third week, spots were observed on the genital organs.
No symptom, either of primary or secondary disease, could be
discovered in the mother. The father, about four years ago,
contracted chancres, was salivated, and secondary symptoms
followed. He again took mercury, and, fancying himself
well, married, and denies having had any primary symptoms
since, although he has occasionally seen white spots on his
mouth and tongue.
Remarks. This is a second example of one mode in which syphilis may
be produced in the infant ; by a constitutional taint in the
father, and no evident disease in the mother. Many of the
gentlemen who took part in the debate on this case, Dr. King,
Dr. Merriman, Mr. Arnott, Mr. Wade, and others, alluded to
similar cases. The one I have brought forward from my own ex-
perience, was watched for so long a period and examined so care-
fully and so repeatedly, that I believe there can be no doubt of
this occasional and perhaps frequent origin of hereditary disease. 1
Primary 336. If a female, not constitutionally affected, at the time
diseases in of her delivery be labouring under a primary venereal disease,
rare' n ^ ant e ^ ner m ^ e shape of ulcers or discharge, it is not improbable
that such disease may be communicated to the infant during its



1 See The Lancet, Jan. 7th, 1845, No. 1136.



PREGNANT WOMEN, ETC.



189



birth, and thus n primary disease be produced in the offspring.
These cases are, however, rare, and persons of the greatest ex-
perience, amongst whom may be mentioned M. Gibert, have
hesitated to determine whether the ulcers or discharges with
which some new-born infants, born of parents labouring under
primary venereal diseases are affected, are due to a primary in-
fection, or to a constitutional taint contracted "in utero."
Bertin, to whom we have already alluded, has however recorded
many cases of children born of women labouring under primary
symptoms, and not evidently constitutionally diseased, who
have presented, shortly after birth, ulcers, bubos, or discharges
which had all the characters of primary venereal diseases,
and were, in all probability, due to infection during the pro-
gress of labour.

337. Two forms of syphilis, however, in the infant, are de- Whatforms

fire l'Gtillv

cidedly primary, due to direct contact or infection, and not p r i mary j„
dependent upon a constitutional disease. These are purulent the infant,
ophthalmia, and ulcers in the mouth of an infant who has
taken the breast of an infected nurse, whose nipples present
marks of ulceration. The former of these is due to contami-
nation during parturition, the second to an infection contracted
after birth. It must not be supposed that the purulent ophthal-
mia of infants is invariably a syphilitic disease. It is not so.
It occurs where the female has never had primary sores or
vaginal discharges of any kind. It is again due to leucor-
real or irritating secretions not of a venereal character, at
least children born of parents so diseased have occasionally
been affected with purulent ophthalmia ; and it happens under
a third form where the mother has decided gonorrhea, ulcers,
or granular erosions of the os uteri. In the latter case it
must be looked upon as a primary venereal symptom, at least
caused by the circumstances on the part of the mother which
we have mentioned. " I do not pretend to deny," says
Gibert, " that purulent ophthalmia may not recognize as its
cause a local venereal disease on the part of the mother, but I
say, that in the actual state of science, this phenomenon
alone is insufficient to characterize syphilis." When it occurs



190



I'iriLITIC DISEASES.



in infants born of parents infected with syphilis in the way I
have mentioned, it is difficult to assign to it any other cause.

Primary venereal diseases in the infant produced by disease
in the passages of the mother are, at least, rare diseases. Drs.
Maunsell and Evanson state (Diseases of Children, p. 531,
ed. 4,) that they do not remember a case of this nature. Their
experience corresponds with mine. I have now under my care
an infant of fourteen weeks old, where neither father or mother
have had any trace of disease for five years ; the father was
diseased six years ago, the mother never. She has had three
dead children, prematurely born since her marriage, and this,
her first living child, exhibited symptoms of syphilis at five
weeks old, commencing with snuffling, discharge of pus and
blood from the nose, subsequently a pustulo-papular eruption,
soon becoming scaly.
Symptoms 338. These are, as we have shown, of two kinds, primary,
in infants! anc * seconc lary or constitutional ; the former rare, the second
more common. Tbe former consist in purulent ophthalmia,
and ulcers of the mouth, to which some have added chancres
or ulcers in the parts of generation or elsewhere, discharges
from the vagina, or urethra, and even bubos. Tbe constitu-
tional forms of disease consist chiefly in affections of the skin
winch are the most frequent, and belong to the various forms
of the " Syphilida" already described. Affections of the bones
are very uncommon, although Bertin has given a case of dis-
ease of the bones and periosteum in an infant thirty-five days
old.

Dr. Golding Bird (Guy's Hospital Reports, April 1845.)
has described a characteristic snuffling as one of the most
marked symptoms of infantile syphilis, " the puckered mouth,
the position of the very characteristic eruption round the lips
and anus, in addition to the peculiar and fissured appearance
of the surface from which the scales have faded, will seldom,
if ever, fail to convert a suspicion of the disease into positive
certainty. Condylomatous excrescences from the margin of
the anus have never, in any of the cases, accompanied the
earliest development of the syphilitic affection, but were always



PREGNANT WOMEN, ETC. 191

secondary, being observed in tbose children only whose primary
affection was neglected or incompletely eradicated. When the
eruption occurring on the nates and face, in the first few weeks
of life had been promptly treated, no condylomata appeared on
the anal margin, at least so long as the children were kept in
sight. But, on the contrary, when the eruptions were ne-
glected, condylomata were the almost certain results."

339. Occasionally infants at the moment of birth present the The period

symptoms of syphilis, and in addition to such symptoms, are j^ h j£ h th

shrivelled and emaciated, the skin hanging in folds in different sym ptoms

parts of the body. It more frequently happens that these of syphilis
1 ■, .„ -i i in the in-

symptoms are not manifested till many clays, weeks, or even fant g ene .

months after birth. More commonly disease shows itself from rallyappear
the third to the sixth week, it may be however earlier, more
frequently later. " In the majority of infants confided to my
care, the disease has not appeared till the first, second, or
third month, and frequently much later." 1 " The two phy-
sicians who had preceded me," continues this writer, "have,
with me, observed that infants born of infected parents, have
not presented the symptoms of syphilis till many months after
birth, and sometimes not till they were weaned, and that up
to this period they had appeared in the best health." The re-
cords of the Venereal Hospitals, "du Midi" and "Vaugirard,"
have shown that some infants born of diseased parents have
never had symptoms of syphilis. In some instances these
were the offspring of parents who had undergone treatment
during pregnancy ; or they were recently affected. In a
second class, much smaller, the parents have never been
treated, and yet the infants watched for upwards of a year
had never shown any symptoms of venereal taint.

340. Many interesting questions propose themselves 0fth
for our consideration in reference to the treatment of treatment,
pregnant women, nurses, and infants. We will consider

first, whether a pregnant female presenting the symptoms
of primary or constitutional syphilis is to be treated, and



1 Bertin, op. cit. p. 97.



192



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



how she is to be treated. Some have supposed that a mer-
curial course predisposed a pregnant female to miscarriage.
This, however, is incorrect. Bertin has stated (Op. cit. p.
169) that pregnant females with constitutional syphilis much
less frequently miscarry when they are submitted to an appro-
priate treatment, than they do if the treatment be postponed
till after delivery. The disease is here more to be dreaded
than the treatment. If the treatment be adopted and con-
ducted cautiously, there is very little to dread, either on the
part of the female, or the foetus. The mother is very likely to
be cured, and a healthy child born. If it be neglected, prema-
ture labour, with death or formidable disease in the child, are
almost certain 1 . For confirmed constitutional syphilis, or
well-marked primary sores occurring in pregnant women,
a modified treatment, the effects of which are to be carefully
watched, is to be adopted, and persevered in till the symptoms
have yielded. If mercury be used, the remedies best suited to
these forms are frictions of small quantities of mercurial oint-
ment, either upon the thighs, or in the axilla, with the mer-
curial vapour bath. These remedies are safer than internal
mercurial remedies, which, if used, should be of the mildest
character. In the advanced periods of pregnancy, great
caution must be observed, and we would then limit the
general treatment to frictions only. The remedies must be
suited to the form and variety of the disease with which we
have to contend, according to the rules already laid down. A
plan of treatment must be framed to suit the particular cir-
cumstances of the case, whether the disease be in the throat,
bones, or skin, and the nature of the eruption, whether pustu-
lar, tubercular, or scaly.

1 Infants conceived and developed in the womb of a female suffering from
constitutional syphilis seldom live beyond the period of the first dentition;
if they survive this period, their health is generally delicate and precarious,
in spite of the most rational treatment to which they may be submitted.
See " Lagneau," Ex-Chirurgien de l'Hopital Veneriennes. Syphilis de la
femme enceinte. Paris, 1812, p. 283.



PREGNANT WOMEN, ETC.



193



" Observation has taught me," says Bertin, " that diseased
pregnant women more frequently miscarry when they have not
been submitted to any treatment, than when they have been
treated during pregnancy, and that when this event happens
during the course of treatment, it depends commonly either
upon the disease itself, badly treated, or treated too late, upon
the state of cachexia or weakness to which the patient has
been reduced by her disease, or upon the excesses she has
committed during her pregnancy."

The result of modern experience shows that a pregnant
female constitutionally diseased may be treated with safety, and
with a strong probability of cure both to herself and the eradi-
cation and prevention of disease in the foetus in utero.

It is not prudent to commence the full treatment of
a pregnant female during the ninth month of her pregnancy.
At this period a palliative treatment only should be adopted ;
if a mercurial one, it should consist in alterative closes of
this drug merely, and frictions with small quantities of mercu-
rial ointment every two or three days, leaving the full treat-
ment to be commenced a month after delivery.

341 . If afemale contract primary sores during pregnancy, two Treatment
things are to be feared : constitutional infection both in her- ° f p ^ a ^
self and infant, and the contamination of the infant during pregnant 11
parturition, a circumstance, though rare, sometimes happen- women -
ing. If the primary disease occur during the earlier months

or middle of pregnancy, the female is to be fully treated,
observing the cautions already laid down in reference to treat-
ments during pregnancy, whether mercurial or not. Mer-
curial inunction is here also the best mode we can adopt if
mercury be indicated. 1

342. When a female is affected with primary ulcers on the
genitals near the time of parturition, they must be destroyed
by some appropriate caustic, to protect the infant from in-

' " Je pense, comme quelques praticiens, que le traitemeut par les fric-
tions niercurielles est celui qu'il convient le plus gendralement d'employer
dans la syphilis primitive des femmes grosses." Baumes. Precis theorique
et pratique sur les maladies veneriennes. Lyon. 1840.

9



194



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



fection on the one hand, and the accoucheur or midwife on
the other. I have seen three or four instances of constitutions
irreparably broken in medical men by syphilis, contracted
from attending a female during parturition, with syphilitic
affections of the vagina or os uteri.

^oTtlie"* ^ W0 metnoc ^ s have been proposed to treat an

infant, infant at the breast which exhibits symptoms of a vene-
real taint at a certain period after birth, and to these
methods the terms indirect and direct have been applied.
The first consists in submitting the mother to a mercurial
course, or treating her by other remedies so as to make the
milk, thus supposed to be medicated, the means of cure for
the infant. Where an infant has been deprived of mother
and nurse, it has been proposed to make a goat the substitute.
Under these circumstances the hair was shaven from the back
of the animal, and mercurial ointment rubbed well and con-
stantly in. The child was fed with the milk that the animal,
thus circumstanced, yielded. To this method the term in-
direct is applied. To the internal treatment should be added
the use of baths, simple or medicated, and frictions upon the
affected parts, with an ointment containing small quantities of
the iodide, or white precipitate 1 of mercury, or the use of
lotions, &c. suited to the particular symptoms under which
the disease exhibits itself, for the treatment of which ample
directions have been already given.

My own experience has been generally unfavorable to
indirect treatments employed alone; associated with direct
treatment, they are doubtless powerful auxiliaries. I most
commonly administer to the infant the syrup of sarsaparilla,
with the biniodide of mercury, in the proportions of one grain
of the salt to four ounces of the syrup ; half a teaspoonful to
be given two or three times a day. Frictions of mild mer-
curial ointment, or a flannel belt smeared with the ointment
and constantly worn, are also remedies of great efficacy.



1 R. Hydrargyri ammonio-chloridi, grs. xv.
Adipis, vel. unguenti cetacei, 5]. M.



195



CHAPTER XXII.

ON THE EMPLOYMENT OF PARTICULAR REMEDIES IN THE
TREATMENT OP PRIMARY AND CONSTITUTIONAL SYPHILIS.



Of particular Preparations of Mercury, and their Mode
of Employment.

MERCURIAL FUMIGATIONS.

344. These forms of the remedy are principally employed
in obstinate affections of the skin, the throat, or the nasal
fossae ; and though they maybe useful in the primary forms of
disease, -without any other mercurial preparation, they are
chiefly so when its external exhibition has faded. The
method employed by Werneck, in Germany, appears the
simplest and most efficacious, and is that which I have now
for a long time had recourse to.

345. Mercurial fumigations, and the mercurial vapour-
bath, are comparatively useless in the primary forms of
disease, unless as auxiliaries to other means. I have
tried them alone in primary indurated ulcers, with, at best,
little success. In all forms of venereal eruptions, when the
fever accompanying their onset has subsided, in nodes, in
indurations of the cicatrix remaining after the healing of
chancres, in ulcers of the throat, and almost every form of



196



SYPHIEITIC DISEASES.



secondaiy and tertiary syphilis, the mercurial vapour-hath,
combined with the -ordinary vapour-bath, is a remedy of the
greatest utility. Alone it commonly works speedy and re-
markable cures ; as an auxiliary in the forms of disease, I
have mentioned it as a remedy of great power. I have ob-
tained, by means of this combination, an almost unprecedented
success in the treatment of all forms of constitutional disease.
I have seen the chronic pustular forms yield to eight or ten
applications of these baths, which had resisted all internal
treatment ; indeed, in many forms of skin disease, a great ex-
penditure of time and health is saved to the patient by the
use of these powerful baths, and they ought, at least in most
instances, to be associated with whatever internal treatment
may be employed.

346. The patient is prepared for the fumigations by low
diet, the warm bath used daily, aperients, and the compound
decoction of sarsaparilla. This preparatory treatment is pur-
sued for five or six days prior to the fumigation, and the pa-
tient is confined to his room, which should be kept moderately
warm. At the end of this period a smart aperient should be
exhibited, and the fumigation may be then employed. The
patient is placed upon a seat, covered with a mantle of waxed
or oiled cloth; the apparatus, which consists merely of a
spirit lamp and a china plate, upon which the cinnabar or bi-
sulphuret of mercury is laid, put under it. The mantle should
be fixed closely round the neck, to prevent the mercurial
vapours escaping into the room.

347. The fumigation is continued for a quarter of an hour,
in a warm chamber, and, at its conclusion, the patient is
directed to go to bed ; it is for this reason that the remedy is
most conveniently employed in the evening. The quantity of
cinnabar necessary for each fumigation is from twenty grains
to a drachm ; one application a day is sufficient, and the cure
is generally complete in eighteen or twenty days ; in case of
salivation occurring, or any circumstances affecting the con-
stitution of the patient, the fumigations must be used less fre-
quently, the quantity of the mercury diminished, or the remedy



CHLORIDE OF MERCURY.



197



altogether discontinued. When the treatment is terminated,
the patient is to change his linen and take a bath. [

348. Very frequently fumigations with the sulphuret of
mercury produce remarkable cures. It is rare that papular or
even pustular venereal affections of the skin resist their appli-
cation. Their use is indicated in obstinate chronic ulcerations
of the mouth, throat, nose, and other parts, and, by a very
simple contrivance, the vapour of a very few grains of cinnabar
may be directed easily into the depths of these parts.



THE CHLORIDE OF MERCURY.

349. The pro to- chloride of mercury, or the chloride of mer-
cury of the London Pharmacopoeia, is extensively used in ve-
nereal diseases. Desruelles speaks highly of its anti-venereal
properties. The following is the form in general use at the
hospital of Val de Grace :

R. Hydrargyri chloridi,
Ext. conii, aa gr. j.
M. Pulveris glycyrrhizae, q. s. ft. pil.

The quantity of the extract of conium may be increased, or a
small quantity of opium added, if the circumstances of the
case require it. These pills are administered at first in the
dose of one or two a day, gradually increased ; Desruelles oc-
casionally pushes them to the extent of twenty-five or thirty
in the twenty-four hours.

350. The employment of this combination of the chloride
of mercury is particularly indicated in chronic inflammations
of the testicle, complicated even with ulceration, or incipient
disorganization of these parts. In such cases, some surgeons
place implicit reliance on this preparation of mercury, and

1 See Werneck's memoir in the Revue Medicale, for January 1831.
Also, Rapou, Traite de la Methode Fuinigatoire, &c. Paris 1824, 2 v. 8vo.



198



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



state that it rarely fails, even in the worst cases. It is also
extensively employed in tubercles of the labia, with or without
ulceration; in various forms of creeping ulcers; and also in
ulcerations of the throat and nasal fossaj. We cannot, says
M. Desruelles, too much recommend this preparation, which
united to opium, and an antiphlogistic regimen, may produce
the most beneficial results.

Another form :

R. Ext. conii, gr. iij.

Hydrarg. chlorid, gr. j.

Antimonii sulphureti praecip. gr. j. M. ft. pil.

Ricord's form :

R. Hydrargyri chloridi, 9j.
Pulveris conii,

Saponis Hispaniolae, aa 9ij. M. ft. pil. xxiv.

These pills may be employed in the treatment of enlarge-
ments of the testicle, which remain after inflammation of this
organ, complicating or succeeding to gonorrhoea.



THE BICHLORIDE OF MERCURY.



351. The bichloride of mercury is employed chiefly in the
French hospitals, in certain forms of primary syphilitic sores,
with hard base and edges, which have resisted the simple mode
of treatment ; also in secondary syphilis generally, particularly
in those varieties of it which are complicated with ulcerations
of the mucous surfaces. According to Dzondi, whose method
of treating syphilis is extensively followed in Germany, and at
La Charite hospital of Berlin, the bichloride of mercury
is the chief preparation of this remedy on which reliance
should be placed in the treatment of constitutional syphilis.

FORM IN USE AT VAL DE GRACE.

R. Hydrargyri bichlorid., gr.

Pulv. opii, gr. 5. M. pulv. glycyrrkizae, q. s. ft. pil.

One a day for the first ten days, the dose then gradually in-



IODIDE OE MERCURY.



199



creased. M. Desruelles does not exceed half a grain of this
salt a day.

dupuytren's form.

ft. Hydrargyri bichlorid., gr. ij.
Pulv. opii, gr. viij.

Gum. guaiaci, gr. xxxij. M. ft. pil. xvj.

M. Dupuytren was of opinion that small doses of the bichloride
of mercury were more efficacious than larger ones, he rarely
exceeded the sixth of a grain for a dose. One of the pills of
the above form were given three times a day.

352. Dzondi's pills each contain one twentieth of a grain
of the bichloride united with a small proportion of opium.
He administered, in the commencement, four a day, half an
hour after the dinner meal. Twelve grains of the bichloride
of mercury are made with an inert powder, as liquorice, into
238 pills. Four of these are given the first day ; the day but
one after, six; increasing the dose two pdls every day, and
leaving one day's interval between each dose, so that on the
thirtieth day from the commencement, the patient takes thirty
pills, or one grain and a half of the salt.

The patient shoidd be strict in his regimen during this treat-
ment, avoiding all stimulant and much animal food. The
efficacy of the plan is much augmented by taking frequent
drinks of the warm compound decoction of sarsaparilla
throughout the day.



THE IODIDE OF MERCURY.

353. MM. Cullerier, Biett, and several others, employ the
iodide of mercury in preference to the bichloride, as more
certain in its effects, and less liable to decomposition. This
preparation may be employed in primary syphilitic sores in
strumous habits, but is chiefly resorted to in chronic affections,
and in those varieties of disease which have been described by
authors as constitutional syphilis.



200



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



M. CULLERIER's FORM FOR THE EMPLOYMENT OF THE IODIDE
OF MERCURY.

R. Hydrargyri iodidi, gr. xij.

Ext. v. pulv. opii, gr. vj.

fiummi guaiaci 3j. M. ft. pil. xxiv.
Capiat 1 nocte maneque.

POMMADE OF VAL DE GRACE.

R. Hydrargyri iodidi, 9j.
Adipis, 3j. M.

Employed in friction upon tumours and indolent buboes after
all acute inflammatory symptoms bave disappeared.

354. It is, says M. Cullerier, in secondary sypbilis
tbat the iodide of mercury is administered with success.
Its effects are principally evident in secondary ulceration of
tbe mucous membranes, cutaneous tubercles, exostoses, and
chronic affections of the joints, where the other preparations
of mercury have had little effect.

355. The biniodide of mercury may be employed in friction
or in pills, in the same manner as the iodide ; it is stronger
and more stimulating, and consequently should be adminis-
tered in smaller doses. Both these remedies may be advan-
tageously employed in all cases of secondary sypbilis, with
more certainty and less risk than the bichloride j also in in-
dolent buboes, in obstinate ulcers with hardened base and
edges. In all instances they must be guarded by opium, and
the patient must be submitted to a strict dietetic and anti-
phlogistic regimen during their employ. The dose of the
biniodide is from -Jg- of a grain to a grain.

356. The iodide of mercuiy is one of the most powerful
remedies we possess in the treatment of constitutional syphilis;
little applicable to the primary forms of disease, in the secon-
dary and tertiary it becomes truly valuable. It is particularly
indicated in tubercular and chronic pustular diseases of tbe
skin; in diseases of tbe bones ; in secondary ulcerations ; in
many forms of cachexia, and in those anomalous and compli-



CYANURET OF MERCURY.



201



cated cases of old standing, where the constitution has long
suffered from protracted and varied treatment, and still the
disease remains. It frequently cures after the failure of all
other remedies 5 the fact is incontestable that one preparation
of mercury is commonly successful when another has failed,
and this is particularly remarkable in the iodide. It should
not be given in too small doses.



THE CYANURET OF MERCURY.

(Bicyanide of Mercury?)

357. The cyanuret of mercury is now frequently employed
in preference to the bichloride, and for the following reasons.
It is more soluble and not so liable to decomposition, acts
more quickly, and does not occasion those pains in the sto-
mach and bowels that so frequently accompany the prolonged
administration of the bichloride. According to the researches
of M. Parent, 1 the cyanuret of mercury is not decomposed by
either acids or alkalis, nor by decoctions containing azotized
principles or gallic acid.

358. The cyanuret of mercury may be administered inter-
nally in pills, or in solution, and used externally in form of
pommade or ointment. M. Cullerier employs the cyanuret in
primary syphilis. Externally it is an extremely useful appli-
cation to various forms of herpes, particularly that form termed
by Alibert, " herpes squamosus," the violent itching and ir-
ritation of which it allays. It may be employed externally
also as a dressing to indolent syphilitic ulcers, and scirrhous
tubercles, or as a gar-gle in ulcerations of the throat. The
dose of the cyanuret is from T ^ of a grain to a grain.

GARGLE OF THE CYANURET OF MERCURY.

R. Hydrargyri cyanuret. gr. x.
Infus. lini comp. ft j. M.



1 Revue Medicale, Aout 1832.

9§



202 SYPHILITIC DISEASES.

PILLS OF THE CYANURET OF MERCURY.

R. Hydrargyri cyanuret. gr. viij.
Pulv. opii, gr. xvj.

Ext. guaiaci, 3ij. M. ft. pil. lxiv, capt. j, tcr die.



OINTMENT OF THE CYANURET OF MERCURY.

R. Hydrargyri cyanuret. gr. xij.
Adipis, 3j. M. ft. unguentum.

SOLUTION OF THE CYANURET OF MERCURY.

R. Hydrargyri cyanuret. gr. vj, ad gr. x.
Aquae, lb. j. M.

Half an ounce for a dose, administered in a mucilaginous
vehicle or with the addition of sugar in form of syrup.



PILLS OF THE CYANURET OF MERCURY.

R. Hydrargyri cyanuret. gr. xxiv.
Ammonias muriatis, jiij.
Guaiaci gummi, jiij.
Ext. aconiti, 3iij.

01. anisi, m. xxiv. M. mucilaginis, q. s. ft. pil. 400.

One or two twice or three times a day, the dose gradually in-
creased. Each pill contains about Jg- of a grain of the cy-
anuret. These pills are a substitute for the bichloride of
mercury in many forms of secondary syphilis.



ANOTHER FORM.

R. Hydrargyri cyanuret. gr. vj.
Opii, gr. xij.

Micae panis. q. s. ft. pil. xcvj.



Each pill contains ^ of -a grain of the cyanuret. The dose
one or two pills twice a day in the commencement, and
gradually increased.



DEUTO-PHOSPHATE OF MERCURY.



203



THE DEUTO-PHOSPHATE OF MERCURY.

359. The deuto-phosphate of mercury is employed in Italy,
more particularly at Naples, in the treatment of venereal affec-
tions in preference to the other salts of this metal. It may
be given internally in pills or in solution, in the same doses as
the°bichloride. Employed by friction upon indolent buboes
or exostoses, it is said to be preferable to all other forms of
the remedy. It is of use also as a dressing to indolent chancres.

OINTMENT OF THE DEUTO-PHOSPHATE OF MERCURY.

R. Hydrargyri deuto-phosphatis, gr. viij.
Adipis, |j. M. ft. uuguent.

In cases of indolent bubo, a few grains are to be rubbed daily
upon the tumour, the frictions also are to be made upon the
groin of the opposite side. Our experience in the use of this
remedy is drawn chiefly from the practice of Fiore and the
Neapolitan surgeons, it is scarcely used in France, although
occasionally employed in Germany.

360. The external employ of mercury is occasionally re-
sorted to by Biett, in the treatment of certain forms of con-
stitutional syphilis. It may be employed in baths, in fumi-
gations, or iu the shape of ointment. Weak solutions of the
bichloride of mercury have been occasionally used at St. Louis,
in the papulous, tuberculous, or vegetating forms of syphilis ;
they have, however, sometimes given rise to serious accidents.
Fumigations or some other form of local applications may be
substituted for them. Ointments of the iodide and biuiodide
of mercury 1 are used by Biett by way of friction, on parts of

1 R. Adipis, 3j.

Hyd. iodidi, gr. xxv. M.

ft. Adipis, gj.

Hyd. biniodidi, gr. xvj. M.



204



SYPHILITIC DISEASES



the skin affected with chronic indolent tubercles (syphilitic
lupus.) 1

361. At the Hospital St. Louis, the preparation of mercury
preferred in the internal treatment of the sypbilida, is the
bichloride, latterly the iodide has been preferred. Small doses
of aether are added to the form of administration of the former
in common use, this adds much to the efficacy of the remedy;
diseases which have resisted the exhibition of the common so-
lution, give way speeddy to this combination. 2 To procure
ease to patients suffering from pains in the bones the bi-
chloride of mercury with opium, in the proportion of an eighth
of a grain of the former, with a grain of the latter, is used by
Biett. Dupuytren had recourse to the extract of aconite for
the same purpose. The cyanuret of mercury is likewise ex-
tremely useful in the internal treatment of the syphilida;
symptoms commonly disappear under its use, which have re-
sisted the other forms of mercury, indeed a change of form
in the remedy we are using is frequently of great benefit. The
cyanuret may be given in solution, containing twenty-four
grains of the salt to two pounds of distilled water ; of this so-

1 These tubercles are grouped amongst the tertiary symptoms by M.
Ricord.



2 SYRUP OF LARREY.

R. Syrup, sudorific., lb. ij. *
Hydrarg. bichlorid. gr. xx.
./Ether, sulphuric. 3ij.
Ext. opii, gr. xx.
Ammonias muriatis, gr. xx. M.
From one to two ounces of this sprup are administered in the course of
the day, in divided doses, in a teacupful or more of the decoction of sar-
saparilla, or some other sudorific.



* The syrup of sarsaparilla may be used for the sudorific syrup ; the
only difference in the original prescription is the addition to the sarsapa-
rilla of an equal quantity of guaiacum.



IODINE.



205



lution, from one to two ounces a day are administered in any
vehicle. The iodide of mercury in doses of a grain a
day, in the commencement, is the remedy preferred by Ricord.
In constitutional syphilis, mercurial remedies are almost al-
ways more efficacious when given by the mouth, than when
employed endermically by way of friction. If one form of
the remedy disagrees, or does not soon produce marked effects,
it will be advisable to have recourse to another, or even a
third, till we have found one suited to the constitution of the
patient, and the individual peculiarities of his disease.

362. Iodine and its preparations. These remedies are em-
ployed largely in the treatment of the secondary and tertiary
symptoms of constitutional syphilis. Iodine of itself is a
powerful antisyphilitic, but, unless in a state of combination
with mercury, is inadmissible in the treatment of the simple
primary forms of disease. It may be employed in the cuta-
neous diseases of constitutional syphilis with great advantage,
and, though a remedy not so active as mercury, is particularly
indicated in constitutional syphilis, where the primary forms
of disease have been treated by full courses of the former me-
dicine. Cullerier uses the following form for its administration.

R. Iodini, gr. j.

Potassse iodid. gr. ij.ad iv.
Aqua:, Jj. M.

This may be put into a pint or quart of any vehicle ; as the
decoction of sarsaparilla, &c. and given at intervals during the
day. The dose of the iodine may be increased to two grains
in the day, and that of the iodide of potassium to six, or ten.
The preparations of iodine are chiefly of use in constitutional
syphilis, in scrofulous or delicate patients, and in glandular
enlargements of syphilitic character, which have resisted the
action of mercurials.

363. M. Eicord employs the iodide of potassium chiefly in
those forms of constitutional syphilis which he has termed



206 SYPHILITIC DISEASES.

tertiary. These are tubercles of the skin and mucous mem-
branes, winch, in the venereal pathology of this surgeon, form
the link connecting the secondary with the tertiary forms of
disease, nocturnal pains, periostitis, ostitis, caries, and tumours
of the bones : in ah these forms of disease, the iodide of po-
tassium is considered by Ricord as the remedy " par excel-
lence." He does not rely upon it so much in the secondary
affections of the skin, unless used in combination with the
iodides of mercury. The dose of the iodide of potassium, in
the commencement, should be ten grains in the day, dissolved
in an ounce of distilled water, and administered at intervals in
any convenient vehicle ; every two or three days the dose may
be increased, observing its effects : it may be increased ten
grains every three days ; it may be carried as far as one hundred
and forty grains in the day without any ill effect. The iodide
of potassium accelerates the pulse, and occasions a slight heat
in the stomach ; generally, however, if the stomach be free
from disease or irritation, it materially improves the digestive
powers. If given in an overdose, the heat in the stomach
amounts to pain, and may be followed by inflammation ; it
occasions also when thus employed, pricking or irritation of
the skin, followed by a pustular eruption ; sometimes the head
is affected, and the quantity of urine enormously increased.
Ricord mentions a case in which this took place to the extent
of forty or fifty pints in the day; it was not found, on analysis,
to contain sugar.

364. Sudorijics. These remedies are commonly employed
with success in the treatment of constitutional syphilis. In
addition to the compound decoction of sarsaparilla, &c. com-
monly used in this country, either alone, or as a vehicle for
the exhibition of other remedies, several forms of these me-
dicines are employed at the Hospital St. Louis, and in the
Venereal Hospital, which may be adopted with advantage.
The decoction of Zittman is the preparation most universally
used, and that with great success. Tt is thus prepared, —



SUD01UFIC3.

R. Rad. sarsaparillae, ^xij.
Aqua;, lb. xxiv.

Boil for two hours, and add —

Aluminis sulph. ^iss.
Hydrarg. chlorid. ,^ss.
Antimonii sulphuret. 5J.

Boil down to two thirds, and add —

Fol. sennas,
Had. glycirrhizae, 51SS.
Sem. anisi, 3SS.
Infuse for an hoirr, and strain.



This is termed the stronger decoction. The weaker one is to
be prepared by taking the residue which remains after straining
the stronger, and adding

Rad. sarsaparillae, ^ij.
Aquas fontanas, lb. xxiv.

Boil for two hours and add —

Corticis canellae, -1
Corticis limonum, I aa 5iij.
Semin. cardaniomi, J
Infuse for an hour, and strain.



The patient is directed to take half a pint of the stronger de-
coction the first thing in the morning, warm, and to remain
in bed some time after taking it. During the day, he should
take at intervals a pint of the weaker decoction, and in the
evening a second half pint of the stronger. The last two
doses aie to be taken cold. Every fifth day the decoctions
are to be omitted, and an aperient taken. This preparation
is chiefly used in venereal affections of the bones, but is not
less usefid in the syphilida generally ; it is employed largely
in practice by Biett and Ricord.



208



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



365. The sudorific syrup 1 may be employed as a vehicle
for other remedies. M. Ricord makes use of it for the admi-
mstratiou of cyanuret of mercury.2 The sulphuret of anti-
mony, or the subcarbonate of ammonia, are also valuable ad-
ditions to the simple sudorific decoctions. The arseniate of
soda administered in a sudorific decoction, or in pills, is a
remedy of great utility in obstinate syphilitic diseases of the
skin ; M. Alibert mentions the tuberculous varieties, or ulce-
rations where its exhibition is most likely to be successful.
The dose is from one sixteenth to one eighth of a grain. Biett
uses it largely with great success.

366. The mercurial vapour-bath should be regularly em-
ployed during the administration of that class of remedies of
which we have just been speaking.

367. The muriate of gold. This remedy is particularly
useful in the vegetating forms of the syphdides. It is pre-
scribed in the form of ointment ; from six to sixteen grains of
the salt to an ounce of lard. Biett prefers it to every other
remedy, as a local application to syphilitic vegetations. In-
ternally it may be exhibited under, the same forms, and in the
same doses as the bichloride of mercury, its internal use is
however uncertain.



1 SUDORIFIC SYRUP.

R. Rad. sarsae.

Guaiaci ligni rasi, aa z,x].
Aquae, lb. iv.

Macerate for twenty-four hours ; boil to one half over a slow fire; strain;
and add from one to two pounds of white sugar.

2 R. Syrup, sudorific. Oj.

Hydrarg. cyanuret. gr. iv. *
Ext. opii, gr. viij. M.
A tablespoonful night and morning, increasing the dose gradually.



OPIUM.



209



OPIUM.

368. Opium has, by a number of authorities, both ancient
and modern, been extolled as a remedy of great value in the
treatment of many forms of syphilis, and by many surgeons
the dose has been carried to the extent of twenty or even thirty
grains in the day. The cases in which opium is indicated, and
in which I have employed it with success, are those of con-
stitutional syphilis where the health has been broken by pro-
tracted disease and the use of mercury, when the nights are
bad, and the patient emaciated and feeble ; where a general
irritability, the result of disease and mercury, prevails, and
appears to be wearing the patient out.

In exostoses, periostoses, local pains, and secondary ulcera-
tions, occurring in constitutions and in persons thus circum-
stanced, opium in large doses sometimes acts magically. I
have employed it also with marked success in secondary ulce-
rations of the throat which have remained after mercury
had been a long time used, and the ulcers still remained re-
bellious to every plan of treatment. In protracted ptyalism,
resisting local treatment, it is also very efficacious. In all
these instances opium appears to subdue a certain constitu-
tional irritability which keeps up the disease and upon which
the disease appears to depend more than upon any specific
cause. It is sui'prising what large doses of the drug patients
in this state will sometimes bear without producing constipa-
tion or headache. I have rarely given more than four or five
grains a day, but I have no doubt the dose, as recorded ex-
perience has already proved, might be carried much further
without anyrisk, should the circumstances of the case require it.
In summing up the history of the remedies employed in con-
stitutional syphilis, Cazenave says, "we have yet another mode
of treatment to recommend, by whose agency we have seen the
most formidable symptoms yield, the most inveterate ulcera-



210



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



tions healed, and the most durable cures produced when all
other remedies have failed. We speak of the aqueous extract
of opium, a precious remedy, even in the most profound ca-
chexia." 1



BATHS.

3d 9. Baths of various kinds may be employed with the
greatest advantage in some forms of primary, and in almost
every variety of constitutional syphilis.

The baths I have generally used are of three kinds : the
vapour-bath, either simple or medicated; the warm bath,
either simple or medicated ; and the fume-bath of mercury, of
sulphur, or of both.

The vapour-bath I invariably employ, is Duval's, made in
this country by Weiss and Sons, of the Strand. It is the most
convenient, and the most efficacious of any I have ever seen
employed. I have submitted patients to its action, who have
used vapour-baths in Russia, Turkey, aud all parts of Europe,
and they have said that they have never used vapour-baths
more prompt or efficacious in their action.

This bath finds its application in almost every variety of
constitutional syphilis.

The water vapour-bath may be medicated by sulphuric acid
vapour, or the vapour of the nitric, or hydrochloric acids, pro-
duced also by Duval's apparatus. These baths may be em-
ployed with the greatest success in a great number of syphilitic
diseases of the skin, in the papular or squamous varieties, or
in constitutional syphilitic ulcers of the skin of bad character,
particularly those which are left, after the detachment of the
crusts, in the pustular forms of disease.

I have employed also, with marked success, the vapour of
water in which a small quantity of the bichloride of mercury
has been dissolved.



1 Traite des Syphilides, &c. Paris, 1843.



BATHS.



211



The mercurial vapour-bath is prepared by combining
Werneck's method of fumigating with the ordinary vapour
bath. It is, in most instances, the most efficacious remedy I
know in the treatment of almost every form of constitutional
disease. Internal treatment should be associated with it.



BATH OF THE BICHLORIDE OF MERCURY.

R. Hydrarg. bickloridi, 5ij — iv.
Aquae tepid., cong. xxx. M.



ALKALINE BATH.

R. Potassse carbonatis, — Jviij.
Aquae tepid, cong. xxx. M.



EMOLLIENT BATH.

To an ordinary tepid water bath add a large basinful of thick
gruel or paste, and mix it well with the water.

370. Of all the auxiliary remedies in the treatment of con-
stitutional syphilis none are equal to baths. In the first class
of these remedies must be placed the vapour-batb, either simple
or medicated. The emollient bath is extremely useful in many
of the exanthematic forms of the syphilida, more particularly
when these are accompanied by fever. The alkaline bath
finds its application chiefly in the pustular forms, particularly
when it is wished to detach the crusts of the pustulo-crustaceous
forms, and the dryness of the crusts seems to show that the
ulcers which they cover have healed. The bath of the bi-
chloride, though extremely efficacious, must be used with
some caution ; it is useful in the squamous and other forms
when perfectly chronic, but will not replace internal mercurial



212



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



treatment where this is indicated ; the same may be said of
the mercurial vapour-bath, and mercurial fumigations gene-
rally, these are to be looked upon as auxiliaries merely, but
auxiliaries of so powerful a character that we should with dif-
ficulty dispense with their assistance.



213



CHAPTER XXIII.

GENERAL VIEW OF THE TREATMENT OF SYPHILIS, 'WITH SUG-
GESTIONS FOR. THE PREVENTION AND CURE OF PROTRACTED
' AND CONSTITUTIONAL SYMPTOMS.

371. In the previous pages, I have given directions for the
treatment of almost every form of primary and constitutional
syphilis ; the nature, however, of this formidable disease is
such, that in many cases it is difficult, and in others impos-
sible, to eradicate it from the system.

Syphilis properly so called is a morbid poison, capable of Nature
being propagated by inoculation in a manner simdar to cow- s yP hllis -
pox or smallpox, and when mixed with the blood, of pro-
ducing eruptions as formidable as dangerous, and sometimes
as fatal as those which are produced by the latter disease,
though much more varied in their character and appearance.
This constitutional taint is always preceded by a primary
affection, in which the disease is more or less local, the
absorption of the virus from the local or primary disease pro-
ducing the constitutional taint or temperament, which results
from the mixture of this specific poison with the circulating
mass of blood. Two things appear evident then from this state-
ment of facts ; these are to destroy the primary or local disease
which is the focus, centre, or origin of the constitutional ; and
to prevent the constitutional or secondary. The immediate
and speedy destruction of the primary disease by incision,
caustic, or cautery, as soon as presented to our -*notice,
unquestionably is the most rational, as well as in practice the



214 SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



most certain method of preventing constitutional taint. And
secondly, the administration of certain medicines, of which
mercury is the chief.

tio?SX /I 2 ' \ C0DSider tllG Speedy and ^mediate" destruction
SnaJy hC °f the 8urface of ^ *in which is the seat of vesicle, pimple,
disease by ulcer, or abrasion, the result of suspicious connexion, as the
escharotics only certain means of preventing constitutional disease.' Those
primary forms of syphilis which are followed by constitutional
disease, are so varied in their character that it is difficult, and
sometimes impossible, to teU from the inspection of a primary
sore or abrasion, whether it will or will not be foUowed by a
constitutional disease. It is our first duty in all instances, at
once then to destroy all ulcers which are the residt of suspi-
cious connexion, completely and immediately. If this were
in aU instances done, there is no question but that the consti-
tutional syphilis would be in most instances altogether pre-
vented.

Not always 373. Unhappily, however, there are numerous reasons why
practicable. ^ cannot alwayg be done Iq m ^ i nsta nces the surgeon is
not consulted till many clays after the establishment of the
disease, when in all probability absorption of the venereal
virus has already taken place. In other instances the situa-
tion and character of the ulcer is such that we are prevented
resorting to the method recommended, though in all instances
it should be done, however long the sore may have been in
existence, if it be in any way practicable.
Object of 3/4. So far for the most certain means of preventing the
ingmerSSy disease extending to the constitution ; the next method practised
is that by the administration of certain medicines of which, in
this country at least, mercury is considered the chief. This
is not so certain a method as the first : mercury has been
recommended theoretically to fulfil two indications in the
treatment of syphilis, — the first to hasten the healing of the
primary ulcer, the second to prevent constitutional disease.
Under many circumstances mercury will answer both these
ends, but again there are many cases in which it will not do
either. There is no reason why a grain of mercury should be



GENERAL VIEW.



215



exhibited for the cure of a primary venereal affection, which
has, on the very first discovery of the disease, been destroyed
by a caustic sufficiently powerful. Many constitutions are
inimical to mercury, and its exhibition so far disturbs the
system that it cannot be borne, and its use must consequently
be given up. There are other peculiarities of constitution, or
conditions of constitution, in which although mercury is
borne, it appears to dispose to the occurrence of certain
diseases which are not known except the patient has had
syphilis, and taken mercury for its cure. One of the most
interesting and important questions to be resolved on this
point is to know whether any and what treatment of the
primary disease will prevent the secondary or constitutional.

375. The speedy and complete cure of the primary sore is the Means of
most certain mode of preventing constitutional infection. The secondary*
treatment of this primary condition will vary, as the nature of diseases,
the primary disease itself varies. I have already spoken of
the best local treatment. Independent of this, however, there
is a great deal in the management of the patient generally,
during the time a primary sore is under treatment, and as
much depends upon the patient as upon the surgeon. I
believe the ordinary methods adopted under these circum-
stances are not sufficient, and that the general habits and diet
of the patient are not sufficiently attended to ; for a constitu-
tional disease is frequently developed under the combined
influence of an over-stimulating diet and irregular habits,
which, under different circumstances, would never have ap-
peared at all. If, as some have supposed, and with reason,
the primary forms of syphilis itself are occasionally developed
under the repeated influence of ordinary irritation, how much
greater is the reason for abstracting the patient from all
sources of irritation, when the primary symptoms of disease
are already present in the system. There is no question but
that the local treatment of, and the constitutional treatment
during the presence of a primary syphilitic sore, has an
immense influence over the production of secondary or consti-
tutional disease. An over-stimulating local treatment unques-



21G



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



tionably disposes to the occurrence of bubo, in the same manner
that the glands inflame, enlarge, and suppurate, in the vicinity
of irritations in other parts of the body. This species of bubo
is also occasionally produced by mere excitement of the organs
of generation, without any syphilitic taint whatever ; of this I
have seen numerous examples. Everything that will tend to
diminish the risk of the occurrences of glandular disease in a
subject affected with syphilis must evidently be of the first im-
portance.

Why se- 376. Many of the primary forms of syphilis are accompanied
condary by a ser i es 0 f symptoms, which have been termed consecutive,

C1IS63.SCS Sl"6 l i ' i i *

sometimes and 'which are ordinary pathological phenomena, dependent

developed, upon irritation or inflammation, not of a specific character, but

more likely to take place in some constitutions than others.

If these are mistaken by the unlearned for specific diseases,

and treated specifically by mercury, constitutional symptoms

are almost invariably produced, when the simplest medication

with unirritating local treatment and a regulated diet would in

all probability have brought the primary disease to a safe and

speedy issue, whdst the constitutional symptoms would never

have appeared at all.

377. Another frequent cause of the occurrence of constitu-
A second . . . 1 . .

cause. tional syphnis is, no doubt, the administration of mercury for
the cure of primary syphilis at improper periods, whilst the
economy is not prepared to receive it. A certain degree of
constitutional disturbance, irritability, or fever, almost invari-
ably accompanies the first days of a primary venereal sore, and
during this period mercury should never be given, nor till the
patient is prepared for it, by low diet, aperients, and the warm
or vapour bath. If mercury be administered during a con-
dition of local or general notability, constitutional symptoms
are very likely to be developed. It is from this cause that we
frequently see constitutional symptoms arising during the
second or third weeks of a primary sore, where the patient
has been suffered to follow his ordinary diet and habits. There
are also certain conditions or forms of the primary sore, and
different varieties of phagedsena, during which, if mercury be



GENEHAL VIEW.



217



exhibited, secondary symptoms are very likely to follow. I do
not condemn mercury, but I condemn its injudicious employ;
and I am convinced, from extensive experience, that its indiscri-
minate use in primary sores tends, in many instances, to de-
velop constitutional disease. I have dwelt tbus long on the
true causes of constitutional disease because of its immense im-
portance, no one knows, when once established, when it will
be cured, or, in some constitutions, in what form it will
return.

378. Again, there are other forms of constitutional disease Secondary
which must be considered as wholly independent of the treat- disease fre-
ment of the primary one, and whicb are the result of absorp- wMl/in-
tion of the poison of syphilis, and its mixture with the blood, dependent
The earlier symptoms of constitutional syphilis in good consti- merrtof the"
tutions appear most commonly under the form of diseases of primary,
the skin in the exanthematic form, accompanied by some de-
gree of fever, but this is invariably of a more chronic character

than that accompanying the eruption of exanthematic diseases,
dependent on other causes. There is rarely anything specific
in appearance in these diseases in the commencement, and the
pustular or squamous appearance is seldom developed till the
eruption is perfectly matured or in the decline. The mucous
membranes are the next parts affected, particularly of the
fauces and throat, deep redness, with superficial or deep ul-
ceration, accompanying most commonly the earlier symptoms
of skin disease. It is not often, if the primary sore have not
been improperly treated, and mercury not hastily or inju-
diciously given, that the more formidable symptoms of consti-
tutional disease make their appearance, before the healing of
a primary sore, soon after it has closed, or whilst the cicatrix
is yet hard. Neither do these symptoms appear in ordinary
cases unless they have been preceded by some affection of the
skin or mucous membranes.

379. There are, however, instances, and I have witnessed Occasional
several, where diseases of the bones and periosteum (which are irregularity
generally amongst the latest constitutional symptoms to ap- j^™™ 16
pear,) have been ushered in almost before the primary sore symptoms

10 appear.



218



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



has been healed; in these instances, the primary sore has
assumed the phagedenic character, and mercury has been
given for its cure. Here again, not only has the treatment of
the primary influence over the production of constitutional
disease, but over the character of constitutional disease.

380. Another very interesting point of investigation, in re-
ference to the therapeutics of syphilis, relates to the nature of
the treatment best adapted to the earlier stages of diseases of
the skin and mucous membrane. As the indiscriminate use
of mercury is to be condemned during the earlier days of a
primary sore, so is it equally to be condemned during the first
periods of skin diseases, accompanied and ushered in by fever,
lassitude, thirst, headache, and weariness. As the precise pa-
thological character of the syphilida cannot be determined on
the first eruption of the disease, and as we well know mercury
is positively injurious in many of these forms, it becomes
doubly important to abstain from its use till the eruption is on
the decline, or its precise elementary character evident. Many
syphilitic eruptions, again, are of a mixed character, and toe
should be guided as to the use of mercury very much by the
character of the accompanying disease of the throat, where this
exists, as it almost always does.
Prevention 381 . A question of equal interest to that already propounded
of the more (-whether any, and what treatment of the primary symptoms
foniVo/ will prevent the constitutional ?) presents itself here. What
constitu- treatment of the earlier forms of constitutional disease seated

dlS " in the skin and mucous membranes, will prevent the more
e<ise. x

aggravated forms (such as diseases of the bones and their
coverings) .

Perhaps one of the most frequent causes of secondary dis-
eases succeeding primary, and tertiary succeeding secondary,
is the recommendation by the surgeon, and the adoption by
the patient, of an incomplete treatment. Thus all treatment
is very commonly given up by the patient as soon as a primary
sore has healed, or an eruption disappeared, and the customary
habits of life are at once resumed, diet neglected, and medicine
thrown aside. In such instances we have only succeeded in



GENEltAL VIEW.



2)9



getting rid of a symptom, not of eradicating a disease ; and incomplete
sooner or later other symptoms are made manifest, and they are treatments,
always of a more formidable character than the last. Endless
examples might be given, corroborating this statement ; a pa-
tient has a better cbance in following no treatment at all than
following an incomplete one.

382. Treatments are rendered incomplete from two causes ; Why treat-
first, from the adoption of ineflicient remedial agents ; and, rendered
secondly, from chscontinuing the remedies too soon. If a pri- incomplete
niary sore be treated, the remedies should be continued for
fourteen days at least after it has healed, and hardness of the
cicatrix disappeared ; in the secondary forms of disease in the

skin and mucous membranes, the patient should follow treat-
ment for a month after the subsidence of symptoms. In the
tertiary forms of tubercles, diseases of the periosteum and
bones, the remedies should be continued for three or six months
after the disappearance of the symptoms. The next common
cause is, the inefficient or improper nature of the remedies
used, or the irregularities of the patient during the time he
is using remedies. If mercury be used, the proportions, and
that form of administration should be chosen which suits the
patient ; again, these preparations must be used at the times,
and under the circumstances already laid down. With some
patients all preparations of mercury taken internally disagree ;
they pass off by the bowels, or produce so much irritation that
their use must be given up. In these instances, frictions or
fumigations may be substituted for internal remedies ; and these
can very commonly be borne, and are useful when internal
remedies are injurious. Under this head may be mentioned
also, the use of mercury for syphilitic symptoms which do not
require mercury for their cure.

383. The neglect of warm, or simple, or medicated vapour- N eg i ec t
baths, during treatment, more particularly of the constitutional of baths,
forms of disease, is, again, one of the most frequent causes why
syphilis becomes protracted, and why it so frequently returns

when it has been supposed to be cured. I have for the last
five years paid particular attention to this subject, and made



220



SVPHILITIC DISEASES.



numerous experiments in reference to it. I have treated hun-
dreds of cases, both in hospital and private practice, with and
without the mercurial vapour-bath ; and, as a general statement,
in almost every form of constitutional disease, I believe I can
truly say that the treatment is diminished from one half to
one third of the time ; the cures are vastly more certain, and
there is no risk to the constitution of the patient, his health
generally being improved by the treatment,
forth"? ° f 384 * Va P our bathing and mercurial fumigations have for a
long period been employed in the treatment of syphilitic dis-
eases, more particularly of the constitutional forms, and with
the best success. In England this mode of treatment has
been too much neglected, but in the great venereal hospitals of
Paris and Hamburg the value of this method is fully and justly
appreciated. 1

I have adopted, however, a method somewhat different to

any I have hitherto seen used; it consists in the application of

mercurial vapour in a moist state to the surface of the skin,

Mercurial combining, in fact, the mercurial fume with the ordinary
vapour- , , T . . J

bath. vapour- bath. 1 nave made a number of experiments on this

combination, and found it succeed in a variety of cases, wbere

ordinary mercurial fumigation, or the vapour-bath, employed

separately, had failed.

Association 385. These baths should be associated with an appropriate

internal 111 ^ nterna ^ treatment. I have certainly seen them succeed where

treatment, internal treatment had faded, but in most instances they should

be associated with it. Such, however, is their efficacy as an

auxiliary measure, that in all instances the internal treatment

may be of the mildest kind. When mercury is indicated, the

assistance afforded cannot be too highly appreciated, since

half the quantity of the remedy will suffice for the completion

of the cure, which is accomplished without risk to the consti-

1 Of all the auxiliary remedies employed in the treatment of venereal
diseases of the skin, the most valuable are, without exception, Baths ; and
at the head of these must he placed the various forms of vapour-baths.
(Cazenave, on the " Syphilida," p. 214.)



GENERAL VIEW.



221



tution of the patient ; a circumstance so much to be dreaded
under the old mercurial plan of treatment. In fact, the baths
are so efficacious that frequently internal treatment will not
succeed without them. I could bring forward many cases as
evidence of this.

In one the patient had undergone a regular mercurial treat- Case,
ment for a primary sore, followed by an excavated ulcer of the
tonsd, and a scaly eruption ; he was profusely salivated, and
kept the house for a month. Two months after he supposed
himself cured he became again covered with a simdar eruption,
which entirely and permanently disappeared under the use of
the baths and very minute doses of the bichloride of mer-
cury with guaiacum. This treatment did not confine him an
hour.

In a second case, a gentleman of large fortune, the patient Case,
had an indurated cicatrix of six months' standing, (a symptom
confessedly difficult to remove,) with an excavated ulcer of one
tonsil, of several weeks' standing ; he had been taking, under
an eminent surgeon, five grains of calomel, and as much blue
pdl, night and morning for three weeks, without the slightest
influence upon the disease, which entirely disappeared under
three weeks' treatment by the baths, and nightly inunctions of a
very small quantity of mercurial ointment. This patient was not
confined during treatment. The permanent induration of the ci-
catrix of a chancre I have seen in several instances removed by
the baths when all internal treatment had faded. I speak of this
symptom particularly, as perhaps one of the most troublesome,
and the most difficult to remove, of any form of primary sy-
philis; it being, as we too well know, the "forerunner of acci-
dents to come." In the treatment of the primary sore the mer-
curial vapour-bath has little efficacy, though I recommend it to
be employed when the sore is about to heal, particularly if any
induration be present, or if any remain after the wound has
closed.

386. In all the secondary forms of disease, more particu- Value of
larly those of the skin, the mercurial vapour-bath finds its ap- t } ie mercu-
plication, associated, according to the form of the eruption na J. bath in



222



SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



forms of and the nature of the accompanying disease of the throat
tional dis- Wlth what ever internal treatment it is thought proper to em-
ease, ploy. The mercurial vapour-bath is to be looked upon as an
auxiliary remedy, but an auxiliary which diminishes the dura-
tion of ordinary treatment at least one half. It should not be
employed during the fever, which sometimes accompanies the
onset of many of the forms of syphilida. Here bleeding, anti-
monials, and aperient medicines should precede its use.

In diseases of the bones and periosteum, in chronic enlarge-
ment of the glands of the groin, and of the testis, in the ca-
chectic conditions which are the result of protracted diseases,
and repeated mercurial treatments, which have broken down
the constitution; these baths, combined with remedies calculated
to improve the general health, in most instances work the most
remarkable cures.



INDEX.



Acid nitrate of mercury, how to prepare the, 81.
Adenitis, 123.

Anus, abscesses in the vicinity of the, the result of gonorrhoea, 63.
Aromatic wine, 85.

Balanitis, causes of, 27. Congenital phymosis, a cause of, 29. Certain
forms of vaginitis, causes of, 30. Symptoms of, 32. Differential diag-
nosis of, 32. Secondary symptoms occasionally produced by, 34. Cause
of, 35, 36. Treatment of, 28. Particular remedies for, 28, 29.
Recurrence of, under various forms, 37.

Baths, 6,210, 219, 220, 221.

Bath, mercurial vapour, recommended in chronic gonorrhoea or gleet, 61.
Bell, B. his remarks on gonorrhoea simplex, 40.
Belladonna, in phagedena, 119.
Bones, syphilitic diseases of, 176.

Bougie, its use advised in the advanced stages of protracted gonor-
rhoea, 63.
Broussais, aphorisms on syphilis, 2.

Bubo — of two kinds, simply inflammatory or sympathetic, or virulent, 22.
Inoculation as a test of the nature of open bubo, 22. Bubo " d'emblee,"
23. Sympathetic bubo does not secrete a specific matter, 23, 25. Its
varieties, 123. Causes of, 124, 136. Abortive treatment of, 124. Use
of mercury in, antiphlogistic treatment of, 125. Indolent, 129. Ter-
minations of, 129. Treatment of, 124-139. Ulcerated, sloughing, 132.
Chronic indolent, 133. Condition of the integument at the edges of, 134.
Internal surface of, 135. Treatment of the premonitory symptoms of,
137. When matter has formed, 138. To puncture, 138.



224



INDEX.



Carmichael, Mr. his views on the treatment of syphilis without mercury, 1.

Caustics, in the abortive treatment of bubo, 127.

treatment of primary ulcers, 84, 88, 89, 214.

Chancre, secretes a specific pus during its first, or ulcerating stage only, 19.
Phenomena succeeding inoculation with the virus taken during the first
stage of chancre, 20. Varieties of chancres not dependent on the spe-
cific cause which produced them, 52. The real position of inoculation in
reference to the therapeutics of primary syphilis, 25.

Chancre of the urethra, 98.

Cicatrix, persistent induration of the, 96.

Condylomata, 165. Primary and secondary, 166. Differential dia-
gnosis of, 167.

Constitutional syphilis, 140.

syphilis, prevention and cure of, 213.

Constitution, state of, during a mercurial course, 15.

Copaiba, 50, in large doses at the onset of gonorrhoea, 51. Essential oil of,
resin of, alkaline solution of, soluble extract of, inclosed in capsules, 52.

Cubebas piper, 53. Cubebine, 55.

Cura famis, 4.

Desruelles, his opinions with respect to mercurial treatment, 17, 18.

Diagnosis, differential, of balanitis, 32. Of gonorrhoea, 44, 81. Of inflam-
mation of the epididymus, 74. Of nodes, 179. Of primary sores in the
urethra, 99.

Discharges from the urethra of several kinds, 38, 39.
Diseases which succeed gonorrhoea in the male, 62.

Emplastrum " de Vigo," 72.

Epididymis, inflammation of, 69. At what periods it occurs, causes of,
not produced by injections, differential diagnosis of, 70. Cases, 71.
Complications, and terminations of, prevention of, treatment of, 72, 74.

Erythema papulous, 145.

Exanthemata, 145.

Excrescences, 165.



Feltz, decoction of, 146.



Gold, muriate of, 208.

Gonorrhoea, in the male, 38. Varieties of, in seat, in character, 38. The
author's division of the varieties of, 39. Simple gonorrhoea, specific
gonorrhoea, and gonorrhoea from a venereal sore in the urethra, 39.
Causes of, 41. Pathology of, 42. Symptoms of, 43, 45, 46. Sympathies



•INDEX.



225



of, consequences and termination of, differential diagnosis of, 44. Ino-
culation with the matter of does not produce a specific sore, 25. Stages
of, 45, 46. Treatment of, 45, &c. Abortive treatment of during the
first stage, 45, 46. Treatment, antiphlogistic, 47. By specific reme-
dies, 50. By mercury, 56. By injections, 57.
Gonorrhoea simplex, cause of, 39. Symptoms and treatment of, 40.
Gonorrhoeal ophthalmia, 64.

rheumatism, 63.
iritis, 68.

Gonorrhoea in the female, nature and seat, 76,

M. Gibert's view of the various seats of, 77.

treatment of, 77, 78.

local treatment of, 78.

speculum, use of, in, 78.

plug, use of, in, 78.

complications of, 80.

differential diagnosis of, 81.

difficulties in treating, 82.

various remedies for, 80.

Hecker, his account of the varieties of gonorrhoea, 38.

Infants, syphilis in, 186.

primary and secondary syphilis in, 189.
symptoms of syphilis in, 190.

period after birth at which syphilitic symptoms appear in, 191.

illustrative cases of syphilis in, 187, 188.

treatment of syphilis in, 194.
Inflammation of the penis accompanying primary venereal ulcers, 91, 92.
Injections, remarks on their employ, 57.

forms for various kinds of, 58, 59.
Inoculation, applied to the diagnosis and treatment of syphilitic

diseases, 19, 26.
Iodine, 205, in chronic ulcerated bubo, 136.
Iodide of potassium, 205.

Kreasote in phagedaena, 119.

Larrey, syrup of, 204.

Larynx, syphilitic ulceration of, 162.

Mercury, of little use in gonorrhoeal ophthalmia, 67.

Mercurial treatment in primary venereal ulcers, question of considered, 92.



226



INDEX.



Mercury, recommended in primary syphilis, 93.
in bubo, 125.

particular preparations of, and their mode of employment, 195.
Mercurial fumigations, 195.

vapour bath, 195, 220, 221.
Mercury, chloride of, 197.

bichloride of, 198.

iodide of, 199. Biniodide of, 200.

bicyanide of, 201.

deuto-phosphate of, 203.

object of administering, 215.
Malapert, his abortive treatment of bubos, 126.

Mouth, state of, to be examined before administering mercury, and during
its exhibition, 17.
syphilitic affections of, 157.
Mucous membranes, constitutional syphilitic ulcerations of, 157.

Nasal fossae, syphilitic diseases of, 160.
Nodes, 176.

Nostrils, syphilitic diseases of, 160.
Nurses, Syphilitic diseases in, 186.

Ophthalmia, gonorrhceal, its three forms, 64.

treatment of, 65.

local remedies in, 66.
Opiate cerate, form for, 85.
Opium, treatment of syphilis by, 209.
Ostitis, 176.

Papulae, 151.

Penis, inflammation of, 91, 92.

Periosteum, "syphilitic diseases of the, 176.

Periostitis, 176.

Phases of syphilis, 140.

Phagedaena, causes of, 109.

Phymosis congenital, a cause of balanitis, 29.

Phymosis, when requiring operation ; not to be performed in balanitis, if
accidental ; recommended if the phymosis be congenital, 33.
accompanying primary venereal ulcers, 91.
Piper cubebae, 53.

Plenck's, liquor ad condylomata, 174.
Position of the patient during treatment, 6.
Pregnant women, syphilis in, 186.



INDEX.



227



Pregnant women, treatment of syphilis in, 191, 193.
Protracted syphilis, prevention and cure of, 213.
Pustulse, 148.

Remedies, particular, in the treatment of gonorrhoea, 52, 60.

Remedies, specific anti-gonorrhceal, useless in gonorrhceal ophthalmia, 67.

Rest in hed, a powerful auxiliary in treatment, 6.

Rheumatism gonorrhceal, of two kinds, 63, 64.

Ricord, his views and experiments on inoculation, 19-26.

Roseola syphilitica, 145.

Salivation not always necessary to produce the full effects of mercury.

Remedies for, 16, 17.
Sarsaparilla, forms for the administration of, 114, 120.
Secondary symptoms, all persons not equally susceptible of, 142.
Sinuses, treatment of, 135.

Sore, state of, to be examined frequently during a mercurial course, 15.
Squamse, 146.
Stricture, 62.

Sudorifics, treatment of syphilis by, 206.

Syphilis, secondary or constitutional, 140. Complications of, 143.
Syphilida, 145.

Syphilis in pregnant women, nurses, and infants, 186.

protracted and constitutional, prevention and cure of, 213.
Symptoms, secondary, occasionally irregular in the mode of appearance, 21 7.

Ulcer, the primary indurated, 95.

Ulcers, primary venereal, forms of, classification of, 83.

treatment of, 84, 97.

local applications for, 85, 94, 95.

caustics in the treatment of, 84, 88, 89.

how to be. employed, 84, 89 ; after-treatment, 90.

when contra-indicated, 90.

dressings for, after the application of caustic, 85.

constitutional treatment of, 86.

diet during treatment of, 87.

mild treatment of, recommended, 88.

phymosis, and inflammation of the penis accompanying, 91, 92.
mercurial treatment in, question of considered, 92.
mercury recommended, 93.
topical mercurial treatment of, 95.



228



INDEX.



Ulcers, syphilitic in the female, situation, and varieties of, 121.

treatment of, 122.
Ulcerations, constitutional syphilitic, of mucous membranes, 157.
of the mouth, 157.
of the throat, 158.
of the nostrils, and nasal fossa, 160.
of the larynx, 162.
Urethra, alteration in the natural elasticity of, an occasional consequence of
gonorrhoea, 62.
primary venereal sores in, history of, 98.
symptoms of, 99.
differential diagnosis of, 99.

complicated with gonorrhoea, 100. With other primary ulcers,

situated externally, 101.
prognosis of, consequence of, 102.
treatment of, mercury in, 103, 108.
cases of, 100, 101, 103, 104.

contractions of the orifice of ; contractions of the canal of, 102.
perforations of, 102.
destruction of, 102.
Urethral discharge, restoration of, in gonorrheal ophthalmia, 67.

Vaginitis, certain forms of, causes of balanitis, 30.
Vegetations, 165.
Vesicuke, 147.

Wallace's classification of phagedaenic primary syphilis, 110.
Warts, syphilitic, general description of, causes of, situation of, 165.

primary and secondary, 166.

contagious character of, pathology of, 169.

treatment of, 170, 174.

use of mercury in, 172.
Weakness and irritability of the sexual system from gonorrhoea, 74.



FINIS.



C. AND J. ADLAAD, PAINTERS, BARTHOLOMEW CLOSh.
