
Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2015



https://archive.org/details/b22027257




LECTURES



THE PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE



OF

SURGERY.



SIR ASTLEY COOFER, Bart., F.R.S.

SURGEON TO THE KING, &C. &C.



lEtgJjtf) lE&itton.



LONDON:




EDWARD PORTWINE, 124, ALDERSGATE STREET,

AND

JOHN THOMAS COX, 84, HIGH HOLBORN.

I



1835.




WILLIAM HENRY COX,

5, Great Queen Street, Lincoln’s Inn Fields.



C O N T ENTS.















Page


Ixtroductory Lecture


-




-




-


1


Ox Irritatiox *




-




-




7


Treatment of Irritation


-




-




-


12


INFLAMMATION ...




-




-




14


Acute and Chronic Inflammation


-




-




-


18


Common, or Specific Inflammation




-




-




19


Proximate Causes of ditto


_




-




-


22


Treatment of ditto ...




.




-




23


Treatment of Chronic ditto






_




-


28


Local Treatment of ditto




-




-




30


Counter-Irritation in ditto


-




-




-


34


Adhesive Inflammation - -




-




-




38


Appearances in ditto


-




-




-


40


Suppuration ...




-




-




46


Ulceratiox ...


-




-




.


52


Abscesses ....




-




_




57


Acute and Chronic Abscesses


_




.




-


60


Granulation ...




.








67


Ulcers ....


-








.


77


Gangrenous Ulcers - - -




-




-




80


Irritable Ditto


-




-




-


82


Sinuous Ulceration




-




.




83


Menstrual Ulcers


.




_




_


86


Ulcers of Varicose Veins




.




_




ib.


Gaxgrexe - - -


_








.


90


Treatment of Gangrene




-




-




100


On Amputation in Gangrene


-




-




.


103


Card uxcle, and Treatment








.




106


Erysipelas ...


-




.




-


107


Injuries of the Head




.




_




109


Treatment of Concussion


_




-






114


Compression of the Brain




-




-




119


Fractures of the Skull


-




.




-


121


with depression




-




-




124


On Wounds of the Brain


-




.




.


129


Inflammation consequent to ditto




-




-




131


On Trephining


-




-




-


135


On Wounds of the Scalp




-




-




138



IV



CONTENTS.



Injuries of the Spine

On Fracture of the Vertebras
Aneurism -

Aneurism of the- Aorta ....

Ascending Aorta

Curvature of ditto ...

Arteria Innominata

Descending Aorta — Abdominal Aorta

On the size of Aneurisms ...

On the formation of ditto ....

On the Cure of ditto ....
Operation of Popliteal ditto ....
Ligatures on Arteries ...

The Application of a Ligature on the external Iliac Artery
On Securing the internal Iliac Artery
Tying the Aorta

Subclavian Artery ...

Brachial Artery ....

Ulnar Artery ...

Radial Artery ....

Carotid Artery ...



Hydrocele ...

Hydrocele of the Tunica Vaginalis
Cure of Hydrocele ...

Hernia ....
Different kinds of Hernia
Oblique Inguinal Hernia
Causes of Hernia
Treatment of Reducible Hernia
Of Irreducible Hernia, and its Treatment
Strangulated Hernia
Appearances on Dissection .

Treatment of Strangulated Hernia
Direct Inguinal Hernia
Operation for Strangulated Hernia
Treatment of the Omental ditto
Omentum in a State of Gangrene
Treatment after the Operation
Operation for large Hernia
Hernia *in the Inguinal Canal
Of Inguinal Hernia in the Female
Operation for Femoral Hernia



l’age

- 139
140

- 144
140

147

148

149
ib.
158
151
154
157
164
ib.

100

107

168

169

171
ib.
ib.

172
ib.
180
188
ib.
190
195
197
■200
201
204
207
212
215

219

220
221
224
220

ib.

232



CONTENTS.



Page

Treatment of Reducible, Irreducible, and Strangulated Fe-
moral Hernia ..... 235

Umbilical Hernia ..... 238

Treatment of Umbilical Hernia in Children and Adults - 239

Irreducible Umbilical Hernia ... 240

Operation for Umbilical Hernia - - - - ib.

Ventral Hernia - - - - - 241

Diseases of the Eye - - - - ib.

Inflammation of the Tunica Conjunctiva - - ib.

Treatment of Simple Inflammation of the Conjunctiva - 246

Purulent Ophthalmia .... 250

Treatment of Purulent Ophthalmia ... 252

Strumous Ophthalmia .... 254

Treatment of ditto ..... 255

Psorophthalmy ..... 256

Nebula of the Conjunctiva .... 258

Pustules of ditto ..... 259

Fungus of ditto .... - - 260

Granulations of ditto .... ib.

Encanthus ...... 261

Pterygium ...... 262

Inflammation of the Cornea - - - - ib.

Ulceration of the Cornea .... 263

Treatment of ditto - - - - ib.

Staphyloma ..... 264

Inflammation of the Iris .... 265

Amaurosis ..... 267

Hydrophthalmia — Glaucoma .... 268

Cataract — Firm or Hard — Fluid — Soft, or Caseous — Mem-
branous - - - ' . - - 269

Causes of Cataract ..... 272

Operation for Depressing or Couching - - 274

Extraction of the Cataract - - - 276

On the Operation for procuring the solution of the Cataract 280
Operation for Artificial Pupil .... 284

Fungus Hsematodes of the Eye ... 285

Cancer of the Eye ..... 287

Hordeolum ..... 288

Trichiasis — Entropium ..... 289

Ectropium ..... ib.

Fistula Lachrymalis ..... 290

Fistulous opening from the sac to the Cheek - - 292



vi



CONTENTS.



Urinary Calculi

Calculi in the Kidney -

Ureter

Bladder

Size ot' Calculi -
Operation of Lithotomy
Instruments used
Difficulties of the Operation -
The High Operation
Operation through the Rectum
After Treatment
Calculi in the Urethra

Of Stone in the Prostate Gland
Operation for Stone in the Female
Calculi in the Submaxillary Duct



Page

- 294

ib.

- 290
298

- 301
307

. 310

317

- 319
320

- 323
324

- 32G
327

- 328



Diseases of the Breast.

Hydatid or Encysted Swelling of the Breast
Of the Scirrhous Breast -

Treatment of Scirrhous Tubercle
Operation for a Scirrhous Breast
Fungus Haematodes
Causes of ditto -

Simple Chronic Tumour of the Breast
The Irritable Tumour of the Breast
Of Carcinoma in the Nipple of Man
Of the Lacteal Tumour
Retention of Urine -

The Operation of Puncturing the Bladder above the Pubes

Puncturing the Bladder by the Rectum
Puncturing the Bladder through the Perinaeum
Dropsy of the Abdomen
Medical Remedies for ditto
Ovarian, or Encysted Dropsy
On Paracentesis Abdominis
Accumulation of Fluid in the Chest
Fistula in Ano
Disease of the Testicle
Fungoid Disease of ditto
The Operation of Castration
Amputations

Amputation of the Finger

Metacarpal Bone of the Thumb



329

333

340

344

345

348

349

351

352

353

354

356

357
359
362
36G
367
372
375

.377

380

383

388

389
391
393



CONTENTS.








Vll


»








Page


Amputation of the Foot at the Tarsus


-




-


393


Flap Amputation of the Leg




-




394


Amputation of the Leg below the Knee


-




•


395


Thigh




-




397


Hand at the Wrist


.




-


399


— — Fore-Arm




_




400


at the Shoulder Joint


-




-


ib.


at the Hip Joint




•




402


On Piles -----


-




-


404


Internal Piles -




-




406


Polypi of the Rectum ...


-




-


410


Nasal Polypi -




-




ib.


Gelatinous Polypus ...


-




-


411


Carcinomatous Polypi ...




-




414


Fungoid Nasal Polypi ...


-




-


415


Enlargement of the Tonsils - - -




-




416


Constitutional and Local Treatment


-




-


ib.


Hare Lip, Operation for ...




-




418


Cancer Labii ....


-




-


421


Tic Doloureux ....




-




422


On Poisons ....


-




.


424


Animal Poisons ....




-




428


Vegetable and Mineral Poisons


-




-


433


Venereal Disease ...




-




443


Virulent Gonorrhoea ...








ib.


Stricture of the Urethra ...




_




452


Abscess in the Lacunas of the Urethra


.




_


458


Extravasation of Urine from bursting of the Urethra






461


Spasmodic and Inflammatory Strictures


-




.


462


Irritable State of the Urethra




-




464


Acute Inflammation of the Prostate Gland


-






ib.


Chronic Inflammation of ditto




_




465


F ungous Polypi in ditto ...


-




_


470


Irritable Bladder ...




_




ib.


Mucous Disease of the Bladder


_




_


473


Paralysis of the Bladder ...




-




ib.


Chordee ....


-




-


474


Chronic Chordee ....




_




ib.


Bleedings from the Urethra


-




-


475


Inflammation of the Testicle and Epididymis -




-




475


Wasting of the Testes ...


-




-


477


Sympathetic Bubo ....




-




478



Vlll



CONTENTS.













Page


Gleet ....


-




-




479


Gonorrhoeal Rheumatism and Ophthalmia




-




.


482


Gonorrhoea in Females


_




.




483


Gleet in ditto -








_


485


Chancre -


_








ib.


Phymosis ....




-






491


Paraphymosis ...


-




.




493


Irritable and Sloughing Chancre




-




_


ib.


Chancres in Women


-




-




49C


Warts .....




-




-


497


Syphilitic Bubo ...


-




•-




498


Sloughing ditto ....




-




-


502


Venereal Diseases of the Mouth and Throat


-




-




504


Syphilitic Eruptions ...




-




-


509


Diseases of the Periosteum and Bones




•




511


On the Use of Mercury in Syphilis




-




-


515


Scrofula ....


-




*7




525


Scrofulous Affection of the Glands of the Neck


.


_


533


Affection of the Mesenteric Glands


-




_




537


Diseases of the J oints ...




.




_


539


Hip Joint


-




-




542


Psoas and Lumbar Abscess




-




-


546


Rachitis


-




-




548


Dislocations ....




-




-


551


Dislocations of the Spine






-




556


Clavicle




-




-


559


Elbow


-




-




565


Bones of the Carpus -




-




-


568


Fingers and Toes


-




-




£69


Lower Jaw




-




-


.571


Hip Joint


-




-




573


Thigh Bone




-




-


cc

I''*


Fractures of the Neck of the Thigh Bone


-




-




ib.


Dislocation of the Knee Joint '




-




-


588


Fractures of ditto ...


-




-




589


Dislocation of the Ankle Joint




-




-


592


Compound Fractures


-




-




594


Suppuration in Bone ...




-




-


605


Impotence ....


-




-




609


Burns and Scalds ...




-




-


610



LECTURES ON SURGERY.



INTRODUCTORY LECTURE.



Gentlemen — While it is the province of the physician to attend to
internal diseases, it is the duty of the surgeon to attend to those that
are external ; to perform operations for the removal of diseased parts ;
and to know how to regulate the system by the use of medicine, when
local diseases are produced by constitutional derangement. Surgery is
usually divided into the principles and practice. The first are learned
from observations on the living when diseased, by dissection of the dead,
and by experiments on living animals. Our deductions from these
sources furnish us with the means of knowing a malady by its symp-
toms, the alteration of structure in a part when diseased, and the various
ways in which Nature attempts the reparative process, both in external
and internal parts. A man who has seen much of morbid preparations
possesses great advantages ; but his anatomical knowledge cannot be
perfect unless he has frequently seen and assisted in the dissection of
the human body. In the surgical science, hypothesis should be en-
tirely discarded, and sound theory, derived from actual observation and
experience, alone encouraged. The first is an ignus fatuus, which is
sure to mislead ; the last a polar star, a never-failing guide. Experi-
ments on living animals have been found of the greatest utility in di-
recting us to a knowledge of the means by which Nature acts in the
reparation of injuries, and in the restoration of lost parts. Thus the
method she would adopt in uniting a fracture in the bone of a dog, will
show you the manner in which union of a fractured bone would be
effected in man ; the secretion of ossific matter by the blood-vessels
being in each case precisely the same.

In the practice of surgery, also, many essential qualities are requi-
site on the part of the surgeon. The first of which is, neatness in the
application of his remedies; awkwardness in this respect will fre-
quently injure his professional prospects — the patient and his friends

n



2



INTRODUCTORY LECTURE.

often judge of a man’s skill by his manner of bleeding, or from the
application of a bandage ; and it sometimes happens that “ the hand
spoils the head.”

The next requisite is, gentleness of manner ; patients having a na-
tural dislike to operations, feel still more uneasy if they discover any
thing in their practitioner’s behaviour which makes them apprehend
rough treatment.

Violence is in all cases bad, and is sometimes followed by fatal con-
sequences.

I was invited by a surgeon, some years since, to see a patient who had
a compound dislocation of the ankle joint : there existed a considerable
degree of pain and inflammation ; the surgeon at once suddenly intro-
duced a probe, raised some of the parts by it, and, his Latin being
as bad as his surgery, said with the utmost coolness, Dedenda est Car-
thago ! “ Carthage must fall !” Thereby implying that amputation
must be performed; indeed, from the rough manner in which he
treated his patient, there seemed no other chance for the poor fellow’s
recovery. In this case gentleness might have prevented the necessity
for amputation.

But the quality which is considered of the highest order in surgical
operations is self-possession ; the head must always direct the hand,
otherwise the operator is unfit to discover an effectual remedy for the
unforeseen accidents which may occur in his practice. Without this
quality a man may do well enough in ordinary cases, but can do little
on sudden emergencies ; it inspires confidence, and almost insures the
success of the operation. These qualities forward the interests of pro-
fessional men, whilst they diminish the sufferings of human nature.
Patients generally form an opinion of a surgeon’s ability by his man-
ner ; if he be of a dry, morose turn, he is apt to alarm not only the
patient, but his whole family ; whereas, he who speaks kindly to them,
and asks for particular information, is supposed to have more know-
ledge, and receives more respect.

In all cases it is the duty of the surgeon, never to advise an opera-
tion, unless there is a probability that it will be attended with success :
he should here, as in every instance, “ do to others, as he would have
others do unto him.” Let it be always remembered, that operations
cannot be safely undertaken by any man, unless he possess a tho-
rough knowledge of anatomy. This is the real groundwork of all sur-
gical science ; and it has ever been found that half-anatomists are
bungling practitioners ; ignorance here, as it always will, gives confi-
dence without power. But it is consolotary to know, that the human
frame is better understood at the present epoch by students than it was



INTRODUCTORY LECTURE.



3



forty years ago by professors. With us, the march of improvement has
been most rapid ; and it has principally arisen from the assiduity with
which the modern surgeons have pursued their avocations in the dissect-
ing room. A few years since, all operations were attended with hazard ;
those now undertaken commonly do well, which can only be explained
by our increased information. An old surgeon, now deceased, said,
“ that operations for extracting stones from the bladder, put him in
mind of sailing between Scylla and Charybdis.” It was replied, “ that
not to attempt them was certainly resigning his patients to Scylla !”
’Tis true, these operations require the most perfect anatomical skill ;
as do those for hernia, aneurism, and fractures of the bones of the head,
attended with depression. Anatomy likewise teaches us how to discri-
minate disease ; in which lies more than half the cure. Without this
knowledge, dislocations frequently cannot be detected ; whereby patients
may become miserable for life, and thus the reputation of the surgeon
be for ever lost. Some years since, one of the profession, whom I had
long known, but had not seen for many years, called on me ; I naturally
inquired respecting his success. He replied, that his life had been like
April, sometimes sunshine, sometimes rain. I rejoined, “ How so ?
you have brought up a family genteely, and have, I understand, a re-
spectable practice.” — “ True (said he), but a circumstance occurred
some time ago which has given me much uneasiness ; I was called to
attend a case of dislocation of the shoulder joint, but it so happened
that I could not discover it ; after attending the patient for a consider-
able time, another surgeon was requested to see him, who at once pro-
nounced the bone to be out, which in reality was the case, for in a very
short time he reduced it. When the man recovered, he brought an
action against me, I had to pay two hundred pounds damages, and the
law expenses were two hundred pounds more. The loss of the m'oney
I did not feel, but I have severely felt being pointed at as an ignorant
man.”

A few years ago, one of the dressers in St. Thomas’s Hospital
wished to perform an operation : and he turned his attention to the
surgery boy, who had a bad leg, and said to him, one day, “Abraham,
I should like to cut off your leg” — “ Indeed !” said Abraham, “ I
should not like it.” — “ Oh,” said the dresser, 44 it will never be of any
use to you in its present state, and therefore you had better be without it.
I will take a lodging for you ; I will give you some money, and you
shall be well attended.” The boy’s scruples were overcome ; he took
the money, went to the lodging ; all was fixed, and the operation be-
gan : but finding a great discharge of blood, he cried out to his assistant
— 41 Screw the tourniquet tighter.” He obeyed, but in doing so the



4



INTRODUCTORY LECTURE.



screw broke, and at this unforeseen accident the dresser lost all presence
of mind ; he jumped about the room, then ran to the sufferer, and en-
deavoured to stop the effusion of blood by compressing the wound with
his hand, but in vain ; his sleeve became filled with blood, and poor
Abraham would have died in a very short time, had not a pupil acci-
dentally called, who had the presence of mind to apply the key of the
door to the femoral artery, by compressing which be stopped the bleed-
ing, and thus gained time for the application of another tourniquet.

Some years ago, one of the dressers at Guy’s Hospital, in bleeding
a man, punctured the artery that lay under the vein (a situation which
he ought not to have bled), and before the blood could be stopped, the
person lost thirty-seven ounces. One of the surgeons cut down upon
the artery at the elbow, and secured it. In doing this, he divided the
principal veins ; inflammation and mortification came on, and death
soon followed.

I bring forward these examples to impress upon your minds that an
imperative necessity exists for making yourselves well acquainted with
anatomical science ; without which you cannot conscientiously discharge
your duty to society ; and it is upon this you must lay the foundation
for your future advancement.

The parts of the body most essential to be particularly studied, are,
the brain, bones, arteries, veins, nerves, and joints. To each of these
you must pay particular attention, and make yourselves well acquainted
with its form, situation, and functions ; otherwise you will only be ex-
posed to ridicule, and perhaps worse, if, in your practice, you should be
ignorant of the nature of these structures. You should know the na-
ture of the human machine well, or how can you pretend to repair it ?
If you have a watch injured, you will not give it to a tinker to repair
. — you will get the best watchmaker you can to set it right. How then
can it be supposed, that the finest and most perfect organization we
know of, when out of order, should be consigned to the hands of un-
learned persons ? Mistakes of this kind do, it is true, sometimes hap-
pen, but much less often now than formerly.

When you dissect, do not attack all the parts of the body at once.
The best plan is, to take the portion that you are examining to your
room, and keep it fresh by plunging it into alcohol. Inspect it with
care, and note down your observations. By these means a head will
occupy your time for five or six weeks very advantageously.

Physiological knowledge is of the utmost importance to the profes-
sion of surgery : this gives you a knowledge of the healthy functions,
and thus enables you better to understand the nature of diseased action.
This was the rock on which Hunter stood, admired by the wise, and



INTRODUCTORY LECTURE.



o



abused by the ignorant ; indefatigable in his research, he omitted no
opportunity of exploding false theories, and substituting true ones
founded on facts established by experiments. But it is said that he
was a man of great genius : I do not think so ; or, if he were, he owed
it to his uncommon industry and assiduity. He was the last in the la-
boratory or study at night, and the first there in the morning, allowing
himself very little time for repose. It was in this way he collected and
arranged that Museum which will endure as long as any thing of the

kind the admiration of foreigners, as well as of our own countrymen.

But we are still more indebted to him for the true principles of our
science, which he displayed to us with a masterly hand. In this free
country, the same way is open to all who choose to take it, who prefer
honourable and laborious exertion to idle habits, which insure igno-
rance, and, finally, disgrace.

The study of medicine is important to the surgeon : he should be
able to prescribe with certainty — should well understand the great
influence of local disease on the constitution, as well as the origin of
local disease from constitutional derangement. Without such knowledge,
he knows but half his duty. On the other hand, a mere physician cannot
be a good judge of surgical cases ; and notwithstanding my respect for
the physicians of Guy's Hospital, I would not hold my situation in that
establishment, unless I had the right of prescribing for my surgical
patients. I had, in one of these hospitals, a man under my care for a
compound fracture, and had great hopes of saving the patient, as he was
doing well ; but a physician, whilst going through the ward, visited
him, and ordered a cathartic, which, acting rather violently, disturbed
him so much, that fatal consequences ensued. That a physician should
not interfere with patients of this description is therefore evident ; but
I do not mean to say that one profession is to be upheld at the expense
of the other : far from it ; indeed they should mutually assist in the
great duty of preserving human existence.

Reading will be found extremely useful, when it is select; but I
would not recommend works to young students which lay down systems
for their guidance ; such a plan of reading is bad. It is better to read
the detached works on particular diseases. To the pupils generally, but
more particularly to those who are allowed to pass in this metropolis but
one or two seasons in attending the different hospitals, I strongly re-
commend punctuality in their attendance at lectures, and at the dissec-
tions and hospital practice. In St. Thomas’s Hospital alone, you have
an opportunity of seeing above 800 in-door, and a vast number of out-
door patients, whose cases are equally useful as interesting to students.
I caution the pupils from speaking unguardedly before the patients : it



6



INTRODUCTORY LECTURE.



can do no good to let them know what is intended for their cure, which
it very often prevents. Some time ago a man came into Guy’s Hospital,
having a disease that required an operation, and by no means a dan-
gerous one. A pupil, when conversing with him, asked him where he
came from ? the man replied, “ From Cornwall.’’ “ O, did you,”
said the pupil ; “ Well, I can tell you, you will never see Cornwall
again.” The patient became alarmed, and immediately left the hospital.

I recommend to you, also, the practice of taking notes, but not hasty
ones, as they do more harm than service, by causing one term to be mis-
taken for another.

I am happy to bear witness to the great improvement which has taken
place, of late years, in the education of those who are coming forward in
the various classes of medical pupils : this I consider a most essential
advantage, as it tends, more than any other circumstance, to raise the
character of the profession to its proper station. To the Company of
Apothecaries, society is much indebted, as to them we owe the Act
which makes a certain course of education indispensable to medical stu-
dents. In the metropolis, surgeons, of course, are highly respected,
but not equally so in the country, for there the practitioner is obliged to
inspect the preparation of his medicines, and, necessarily, must be often
in his shop. But general education, so essential to our profession in
particular, is making rapid and desirable advances, whilst ignorance
flies fast before it.

I particularly request the young pupils, whose friends have at great
expense prepared them for an honourable and lucrative profession, not
to lose their precious time in idle and vain amusements; and while they
have those opportunities which our hospitals afford, to keep their atten-
tion steadily fixed on the various branches of science which are essen-
tial to a knowledge of surgery, and not suffer themselves to be led away
from the true path to eminence by the idle and unthinking : for, I ask
them, how they can, on their return home, look their friends in the
face, if they have neglected their duties ? But, on the other hand,
should they conduct themselves with good sense, and apply with dili-
gence to their studies, they will receive their just reward.

I have probably known ten thousand members of the faculty in the
course of my professional life, to whose partiality I attribute my success-
ful progress, more than to any merit of my own : and I should be
wanting in gratitude if I did not acknowledge it. I have observed that
well-directed assiduity will surmount all difficulties : you should not be
deterred in your efforts, even by poverty, for it is a great stimulus to
exertion, and to regularity of life ; all, however, will not be equally
studious, for some will be fluttering in the boxes of another theatre, or



ON IRRITATION.



7



come here only to interrupt their more steady fellow-students. But I
will not suffer it as long as I have the honour of lecturing in this esta-
blishment : no man shall interrupt another with impunity. Perhaps
some who arc fashionably dressed may think proper to look down with
a feeling of contempt upon the students whose attire is plain and more
modest ; but should such a feeling exist, I would advise such persons
to pause awhile and consider what it is that makes one man superior to
another in this profession. When they commence their career of public
life, the plain, industrious, intelligent young man goes slowly but
steadily in the right track of his profession, and rises to respectability,
perhaps even to a high rank ; on the other hand, the fashionable
lounger, who neglects to improve himself, finds his want of knowledge
and his bad habits equally retard him ; instead of rising, he sinks lower ;
his friends disappear, and at last he falls into obscurity, reduced to a
pitiable state, blaming and abusing his more fortunate rival. In con-
clusion, let me say, that if any of you wish to ask my advice or assist-
ance in any way, I shall be most happy if you will call on me when you
think proper. I do not say this from ostentation, but I always wish to
show the junior members of the profession that I do not forget the
friendship I have experienced from their fathers.



LECTURE I.

IRRITATION.

This being one of the most important topics in surgery requires to be
attentively studied, and its effects carefully watched, before any one can
practice in his profession with credit to himself or advantage to others.

Irritation is either local or general, and its effects are communicated
from one part to another, through the medium of the nervous system,
so that the heart, brain, and stomach, almost immediately after an
injury has been sustained, even in the remotest parts of the body, will
have their functions more or less disturbed in proportion to the extent of
the injury and importance of the part injured. All the actions of the
body are excited and sustained by internal and external impressions,
which are called stimulants ; the blood, for instance, being the stimulus
to the blood-vessels ; the bile to the intestines ; and caloric, in a certain
degTee, a stimulus to the whole system. Between all the different parts
of the human frame there exist intimate relations, which correspond
with each other, and carry on a reciprocal intercourse of action. The
beautiful harmony produced by these concurrent phenomena is called
sympathy. Thus, impressions not only produce effects on the part to



8



ON IRRITATION.



which they are directly applied ; but in consequence of tile freedom of
communication between the nervous system, parts of the body situated
at a distance from those in which the original mischief exists become
affected by it: the real nature of sympathy is yet unknown, but we are
acquainted with many of its effects. Thus numerous examples of
sympathetic actions may be adduced ; the communication which exists
between the uterus and breasts is a striking instance of it. Sneezing is
a sympathetic action between the nose, velum palati, and the abdominal
muscles; coughing, also breathing, and the expulsion of the faces, are
a few among the numerous examples which might be enumerated.

But sympathetic action is also the result of injury and disease, be-
coming the cause of restoration on the one hand, or of destruction on the
other, and this state of the body I call irritation. Irritation, gentle,
men, may be defined to be an altered action, excited in the system by
an unnatural impression. Thus sympathetic pain is experienced in the
knee and foot from diseased hip, and at the extremity of the penis when
there is stone in the bladder. The passage of an urinary calculus
through the ureter occasions retraction of the testicles and pain in the
thigh ; disease of the prostate causes pain on the inside of one or both
thighs. A disease of the liver occasions pain in the shoulder ; a
diseased testicle, pain in the loins ; irritation of the intestines, an itching
of the nose.

These sympathetic effects, which we have just been describing, do not
consist of morbid actions in the parts thus affected, but of disordered
sensations. But morbid actions are also, sometimes, excited in parts
near to, or at a distance from, those originally affected. Inflammation
of the testicle is frequently the consequence of irritation in the urethra ;
and swellings of the breast, of a morbid action of the uterus : but there
is no organ so much affected by irritation, or sympathetic influence as
the stomach. For instance, if a blow is received on the head, causing
injury to the brain, vomiting is one of the first and most constant symp-
toms, being imparted to the stomach through the eighth pair of nerves,
and by this we are led to detect the injury. Vomiting is produced when
the testicles are injured, or intestines burst, wounded, or strangulated,
and from a gall-stone passing the biliary duct; indeed, an obtuse pain
in any part of the body will occasion sickness.

The consequences of irritation are so numerous and important, gen-
tlemen, that I shall relate to you the medium of its communication.
Irritation is generally communicated through the medium of the nerves,
of which there are two grand divisions in the body. The first composed
of the brain, spinal marrow and their nerves, which naturally convey
sensation and volition ; the second consisting of the grand sympathetic



ON IRRITATION.



9



nerve, the centre of which is behind the stomach, in the semilunar gan-
glion and solar plexus. The modes of sympathetic communication are
various. In some instances, the course of irritation is from the irritated
part to the sentient extremity of the nerve, as the pain experienced
in the knee and foot from a disease of the hip. In other cases the course
of sympathy is from the affected part to the origin of the nerve, as in
pain in the loins consequent on diseased testicles. Irritation on the
nerves of the grand sympathetic is communicated to the stomach, pro-
bably through the medium of the semilunar ganglion, and all injuries
to the stomach are attended with serious effects. I could relate to you
several instances in which injury to this organ had proved fatal. A man
walking through Fleet-street, one day, happened to quarrel with a
woman, when another came up, and gave him a blow in the region of
the stomach, which caused almost instantaneous death. On dissection,
no cause could be found to account for his sudden death. A man
belonging to the India House was attempting to lift a weight, when
another came up, and jocosely said, “ Here, stand on one side, and let
an abler man attempt it ; ” and at the same instant gave him a slight
blow on the stomach, when the poor fellow dropped down and expired.
His body, upon being opened, showed no marks of violence.

Irritation is either local or constitutional.

Sometimes it is local, affecting only particular parts ; at others,
attacking the whole system. A decayed tooth will produce an abscess,
and the matter will escape by forming an opening through the cheek.
This ulcer will be very difficult to heal if the tooth remain : but extract
it, and the disease will quickly disappear, the cause of irritation being
removed. Many cases of this kind have fallen under my observation,
and I will relate a few by way of illustration.

Cases . — Some years since, two persons came to me from Wisbeach,
(without being aware of each other’s situation, or of what surgeon each
had consulted), both having an extensive abscess near the alveolar pro-
cess, which had produced an opening through the cheek. The disease
in both had been of long standing, and the pain extended to the sur-
rounding parts of the jaw. I directed a diseased tooth near the ulcer,
in each person, to be drawn, which being done, the patients rapidly
recovered.

A lady in Essex had, for a long period, been afflicted with a fungoid
granulation, which protruded through an ulcer in the cheek, and which
had resisted the use of every means. Upon stating one day that a tooth
near the part was occasionally painful, she was recommended to get it
drawn ; the tooth was extracted, and the fungus quickly disappeared.

A gentleman of my acquaintance had, for many years, been exceed-



]()



ON IRRITATION.



ingly annoyed by an ulcer on the chin ; every attempt to heal it having
proved ineffectual, it was considered incurable. At length, one of the
teeth opposite the wound becoming painful, it was extracted, when, to
the delight and astonishment of the patient, his malady disappeared.
These cases are mentioned, to show the importance of endeavouring to
ascertain the causes of diseased sympathetic actions, as the removal of
those effects will depend on the cure of their causes. If the causes be
undiscovered, the effects are likely to continue in spite of every means
that you may employ.

The constitutional or general effects of irritation are frequently pro-
duced by the most trivial local causes. A person, on having a bougie
passed into the urethra for the first time, feels faint, becomes sick, looks
pale, and, unless you prevent it, will fall on the ground. On placing
him in the recumbent posture, he soon recovers his senses : but constitu-
tional irritation frequently comes on in the evening, which, however,
soon ceases. From the irritation of the urethra you see, gentlemen,
that the stomach is influenced, the actions of the heart are suspended,
and the powers of the mind gone. The symptoms of constitutional irri-
tation following injuries are best exemplified in compound fractures. In
these cases, the irritation runs very high, and the heart, brain, and sto-
mach are much affected. A person receives an injury to the leg, pro-
ducing compound fracture of one or both bones ; constitutional irritation
commences generally in twenty-four hours ; the patient complains of
pain in his loins, extending up the spinal cord, and pain in the head.
He then becomes restless, and his countenance anxious ; the tongue at
first is dry, and covered with a whitish fur ; but, as the symptoms in-
crease, it becomes yellow, and lastly, coated with a thick brown fur.
There is loss of appetite, the stomach becomes irritable, and nausea and
vomiting supervene. The secretions are diminished, and the stools are
white. As the severity of the complaint increases, the pulse becomes
quick, hard, irregular, and alternately intermittent. The respiration is
hurried, intellect deranged ; all impressions on the senses are painful ;
subsultus tendinum, hiccough, vomiting, and tension of the abdomen
come on ; the patient sinks into a low muttering delirium, and soon
expires. Thus, in constitutional irritation, whether from injury or
disease, every part of the system is affected by it, and this effect appears
to be produced in the following manner : — When any part of the body
receives an injury, the nerves convey to all the important organs ot the
body, spinal marrow, heart, stomach, &c., an impression of that injury.
Nature immediately commences the restorative process, by stopping all
the customary secretions ; the various outlets being thus closed, the
blood collects in large quantities in the heart and great blood vessels,



ON IRRITATION.



11



which propel the blood with increased force to the wounded part ; this
gives rise to some form of inflammation, the one best suited to accom-
plish the desired effect. Here is an illustration of the manner in which
nature contends for cure ; during the battle, she occasionally requires
to have her ardour checked, or calls for support in proportion to her
want of power ; we must watch her proceedings with an eagle eye, and
be exceedingly cautious in all our proceedings : for if we should open
the various sluices of the body, and restore the secretions too soon, we
may, by abstracting blood from the injured part, prevent the restorative
process ; or by increasing the excitement, disturb nature’s operations.

The degree of constitutional irritation, resulting from injury, depends
on several causes ; these are the importance of the part injured; the
extent and nature of the injury ; the state of the constitution, age, and
previous habits of the patient. Thus we see, that constitutional irri-
tation is very different in some persons to what it is in others ; so that
a wound, which in one man would be attended by the most dangerous
consequences, might not, in another, disturb the functions of any im-
portant organ : this greatly depends on the state of the system at the
time of the injury ; thus, many gentlemen present would probably in
autumn overcome a disease, that in the spring would overcome them ;
that is, if they have been paying proper attention to their professional
studies, by devoting their time to anatomical pursuits.

The following cases are important, and place in a strong light the
dreadful constitutional effects which occasionally result from very slight
local causes : —

A man, who had lived intemperately, was bled by the late Mr.
Saunders, on a Tuesday ; on Thursday (having indulged in the interim
in the pleasures of the table) the wound in the arm was inflamed ; on
the Saturday the inflammation had considerably increased ; on the
Sunday gangrene commenced ; and on the Monday I was asked to see
him. I found him with delirium, hiccough, and subsultus tendinum ;
and on the following day he died. On dissection, the skin, to a great
extent round the wound, was found mortified ; the cellular membrane-
had inflamed and suppurated, but the vein which had been opened was
not inflamed.

Dr. Ludlow, of Caine, whilst shooting, pricked his hand with a thorn
in getting over a hedge; the part soon became inflamed, and though he
procured the best surgical assistance, yet he died of tetanus within a
week after the accident.

Another remarkable case was that of a brewer’s servant, who, in re-
moving some casks on a Saturday, had a small splinter of wood forced
under the thumb nail ; at the moment he did not regard it, but in the



12



TREATMENT OF IRRITATION.

same night he awoke in dreadful pain, and requested his wife to get up
and make a poultice ; this he applied, but it did not afford him any
relief. On Sunday he became worse: Tuesday the pain had extended
up the arm, and his hand was considerably swollen. On Thursday I
was requested to see him, and, on examination, found that matter was
formed in the hand ; I made an opening with a lancet near the part
where the splinter had entered, when a large quantity of pus was dis-
charged. The man appeared greatly relieved, and I thought he would
do well ; but upon hearing a noise as I was about to quit the room, I
looked round : he had, by a convulsive effort, raised himself in bed, but
immediately fell back, and expired.

Case . — An instance of a totally different nature from those just men-
tioned, which shows that a great degree of injury may be incurred, and
the person yet do well, occurred in another brewer’s man who was run
over by a dray. There was compound fracture of the elbow joint, ex-
tensive laceration of the integuments, and a large wound communicating
with the joint. The man w'as admitted into Guy’s Hospital ; an opera-
tion was proposed, but the patient would not consent. The wound was
therefore dressed, and in a short time it completely healed, without any
unfavourable symptom showing itself.

Irritation is greatest in children, and least in aged persons ; the
former are very much affected by operations, whilst the latter are very
slightly so. Children under two years of age, upon having stones re-
moved from their bladders, will be frequently carried off by convul-
sions ; therefore, if you can possibly avoid it, never perform the opera-
tion on a very young child ; at all events, not under three years of age.

One of the worst kinds of irritation is that occasioned by the absorp-
tion of morbid matter during dissection ; it is therefore impossible that
you can be too careful of the instruments you use in dissecting and
opening bodies, as carelessness on this point has caused the loss of
many a valuable life.



LECTURE II.

TREATMENT Or IRRITATION.

The treatment of irritation being much the same as that required in
inflammation, I shall now give but a short description of it.

When constitutional irritation arises from a local cause, the remedies
must be chiefly directed to the removal of that cause, or to lessen its
effects on the constitution ; but, on the contrary, when local disease is
either promoted or aggravated by constitutional derangement, then your



TREATMENT OF IRRITATION.



13



remedy must be directed to the disorder of the system ; and as that im-
proves, so will the local affections disappear.

Case A short time since, a case of compound fracture was brought

into Guy’s Hospital. For the first five days there was no alteration ;
after a time, however, the man’s constitution suffered very consider-
ably ; a probe was passed into the wound, and a loose portion of bone
was found pressing against the tibialis anticus ; the part was dilated by
a scalpel ; the detached bone extracted ; the constitution began to re-
cover its former vigour, the patient’s health very rapidly improved, and
he is now discharged cured.

A case of simple fracture of the superior portion of the tibia was ad-
mitted into St. Thomas’s Hospital, which was followed by violent irri-
tation of the whole system. The whole limb became inflamed, and
matter formed at the seat of the fracture. After a short time it was
thought proper to amputate the limb, when, on examining afterwards,
small pieces of bone were found, which kept up the irritation. The pa-
tient soon recovered from the operation.

Constitutional irritation must not be too suddenly subdued nor de-
stroyed, as a certain degree of irritation shows that nature is endea-
vouring to accomplish the restorative process ; keep it within bounds,
carefully watch its progress, and, if necessary, check its violence, but
do not entirely destroy it.

There are two means of reducing irritation.

First, by restoring to the different organs their various secretions, by
which the outlets become opened, and feveT lessened. A man who has
his skin hot and dry, and his body altogether hot, will feel well and be
relieved, if you can produce on the surface a free perspiration. To
produce the secretions from the intestinal canal, you must give ape-
rients ; but when the irritation is very severe indeed, you must not
limit your medicine to any particular part, but endeavour to restore all
the secretions. This will be best accomplished by administering mer-
curials to act upon the liver, saline medicines upon the intestines and
kidneys, and antimonials on the skin.

The second method of relieving irritation is to allay the excitement
of the nervous system ; this may be done by giving opium and anti-
mony combined, or calomel, antimony, and opium, to act on the skin
and liver as well as the nervous system. The dose for an adult is two
grains of calomel, two of antimonial powder, and one grain of opium.
To this you may add saline medicines, if you like, as they are given as
much to assist the medical man as his patient ! It must not be consi-
dered, however, that such medicines are entirely useless : the liquor
ammonia acetatis, with tincture opii, is a good medicine. The alka-

c



14



ON INFLAMMATION.



lira, judiciously given, lessen the irritability of some organs, as the
bladder, when in an irritable state.

In cases of irritation, bleeding must be resorted to with care, for if it
be carried to a great extent, the powers of the constitution will be un-
equal to the reparation of the injury.

A man was brought into Guy’s Hospital with concussion of the
brain ; the dresser who admitted him was a great admirer of venesec-
tion, and bled the patient three times a day; in ten days he died. Upon
examining the head after death, a very slight laceration of the brain was
found, but no signs of any attempt at restoration. The continued ab-
straction of blood had robbed nature of her restorative powers. In com-
pound fractures it is likewise extremely dangerous to bleed largely.

When there is chronic irritation, no medicine will be found equal to
the Plummer’s pill, five grains night and morning ; it increases the
secretions of the liver, intestines, kidneys, and skin. If the blue pill
be given, or calomel, it should be followed by an aperient in the morn-
ing, else its action will be confined to the liver.

INFLAMMATION.

The next subject is inflammation. Inflammation is the means by
which local injuries are repaired, and it may be therefore considered as
the restorative principle. There are four signs that commonly attend
it, viz. redness, pain, increased heat, and swelling.

First. Redness. This arises from an increase of the red particles
of blood in the part, and may be distinctly seen when the inflammation
is superficial, as in inflammation of the conjunctiva of the eye.

Second. Increased Sensibility, which is owing to distention of the
nerves by the greater quantity of blood determined to them. Parts na-
turally little sensible are quite the reverse when in a state of inflamma-
tion. I was called a short time since to a case where it was requisite
to saw off a small piece of the tibia. During the operation I opened a
cavity, in which was a small piece of bone embedded in granulations ;
the latter were extremely sensitive : extract of belladonna was applied,
which gave instant ease. Bones, though nearly destitute of sensation
in their healthy state, are sometimes extremely sensitive when inflamed.

Third. Increased Heat. Mr. Hunter denied that this existed.
He made an incision two inches deep into the gluteal muscles of an ass,
and into the wound he introduced a tin canula, one inch and a half
long, so that there was half an inch of wound below the canula ; he
then passed a plug of wood through the canula, to the bottom of the
wound, and confined it there, in order to prevent an union of the
muscles. This was on a Wednesday. Immediately after the wound



ON INFLAMMATION.



15



was made, a thermometer was introduced into it, and the mercury
rose to 100 deg., exactly as another did at the same time which had
been passed in the vagina. On the next morning the plug was taken
out, and the ball of the thermometer introduced to the bottom of the
wound; the mercury rose to 100 deg.; the plug was then again re-
turned, and secured as before. In the evening the experiment was
repeated with the same result. On Friday morning the thermometer, ,
when introduced, rose to 99 deg. only ; and in the evening it rose to
101 deg. On Saturday morning, when introduced again, the mercury
reached 99 deg.; in the evening 100 deg. Mr. Hunter also intro-
duced a thermometer into the opening made during the operation for
hydrocele, and it rose to 101 deg. ; after twenty-four hours it was no
more than 100 deg. Though no increase of heat is manifested in
internal inflammation, yet when it occurs on the surface of the body, an
alteration sometimes of several degrees takes place ; as on the inside of
the thigh, where a blister was applied, the thermometer rose to 90 deg.;
while on the inside of the opposite thigh it only reached 83 deg.

Fourth. Swelling. This is owing in part to an increased determi-
nation of blood to the part, and also depends on effusion of the fibrin of
the blood, which, in coagulating, deposits serum in the surrounding
cellular tissue.

Inflammation has four terminations.

First. Adhesion. This arises from the fibrin of the blood being
effused into the cellular membrane, by which the parts become glued
together.

Second. Suppuration , or secretion of pus. This is composed of
particles nearly similar to those of the blood, only differing in colour,
swimming in a fluid resembling serum, and coagulating, as serum does,
when exposed to the influence of heat.

Third. Absorption , or ulceration. This arises from an increased
action of the absorbents, produced by pressure united with inflamma-
tion, by which the parts are absorbed.

Fourth. Gangrene , which consists in the destruction of the life of
an inflamed part. The arteries, enfeebled by excessive action, are
deprived of their vitality, the blood coagulates in them, and gangrene
is produced.

These are the constitutional effjcts ; the local ones are similar to
those of irritation, which I mentioned to you in the last lecture.

Inflammation produces different results in different parts. When
seated in the skin, it usually becomes extensive, because the surface is
unbroken. Its colours is very florid ; it separates the cuticle in the
form of vesications, which usually contain serum, but also in some

c 2



16



ON INFLAMMATION.



cases fibrin ; a serous effusion is also produced by it into the subjacent
cellular tissue. In some instances it is preceded by fever, in others fol-
lowed by it. In the cellular membrane, inflammation produces an
effusion which obliterates or fills its cells ; if it proceed, it occasions
suppuration, and produces an abscess, the contents of which are fre-
quently discharged by the process of ulceration. In debilitated irritable
constitutions inflammation destroys the cellular tissue, and produces
carbuncle, which is a sloughy abscess in the cellular tissue. When
chronic it occasions tumours of various kinds, as the steatomatous or
adipose; or, under peculiar circumstances, those of a malignant nature,
as the scirrhous, fungous, &c.

Inflammation of fasciae is generally extensive, from the large surfaces
they present; they are often seen inflamed in compound fracture, pro-
ducing redness of the skin to a considerable distance, and it is a very
unfavourable sign in this accident. When matter is produced by in-
flammation of this texture, and is seated under it, great irritative fever
succeeds until it is discharged; as, for example, in the palms of the
hands, or soles of the feet.

When inflammation attacks muscles, it is known by the spasmodic
twitchings which attend it. Tendons are not very susceptible of
inflammation, but they sometimes become inflamed to a consi-
derable extent. Punctured wounds of tendons are apt to produce teta-
nus more than wounds of other parts of the body. Matter formed
under tendons burrows to a great extent, and produces violent irritation,
as under the tendon of the occipito-frontalis muscle, and the covering
of the temporalis.

Inflammation in the absorbent vessels is marked by red lines on the
skin in the course of these vessels. These form hard knots, from the
skin participating in the inflammation. Their glands become also
inflamed, and both glands and vessels occasionally suppurate. They
more frequently inflame from common irritation than the absorption of
poisons.

The arteries are rarely inflamed, excepting after wounds, or the ap-
plication of ligatures. Inflammation, however, of the arteries may be
very extensive, when it occurs in a person whose health is very much
deranged. I have known instances where it extended even to the heart.
I was present when Mr. Cline opened the body of a man who had a
ligature put on the femoral artery near the groin, and who died at the
second week from the operation. The internal surface of the artery
was inflamed, as was also that of the external and common iliacs,
and the aorta was of a florid red internally, as far as the valves of the
heart.



ON INFLAMMATION.



17



Veins which are inflamed from wounds become like hard and broad
cords, and extremely tender to the touch ; and if it occur from bleed-
ing, it extends from the orifice to the axilla. I have seen several pa-
tients die from this cause ; and, on examination, the inner coats of the
arteries have been generally found adhering. I have seen suppuration
of a vein, and I once saw an abscess in the longitudinal sinus of the
dura mater, of which we have a beautiful specimen in the anatomical
collection at St. Thomas’s Hospital. When inflammation of the veins
is produced by the application of ligatures on them, it will be found to
be greater below the ligature than above it.

Nerves are very rarely inflamed, but when they are, the pain is ex-
cessive, and there is a tingling sensation in the parts to which the nerve
is distributed. Wounds of nerves, though extremely painful at the
moment, are followed by little irritation.

Case . — The wife of a medical gentleman was obliged to have the
posterior tibial nerve divided, for a painful tumour on the nerve, which
I did in the presence of Mr. White, surgeon to the Westminster Hos-
pital : although the operation was dreadfully painful, and the pain ex-
tended through the brain, spinal marrow, and the nerves proceeding from
it, yet it did not affect the nerves of the great sympathetic, directly or
indirectly. I have also had occasion twice to remove portions of the
sciatic nerve, when but little constitutional irritation followed. Severe
pain takes place sometimes in the course of the nerves, but whether it
be from inflammation or not, I have not been able to ascertain by dis-
section. When the pain is excessive, it is called tic doloureux.

Ligaments, like tendons, are not very prone to inflammation in
healthy constitutions ; but the synovial membrane which lines them is
highly so, and the inflammation has a tendency to go on to the suppu-
rative process. In scrofulous persons, the synovial surface becomes
inflamed, and the ligament covering it thickened, so as to produce great
enlargement of the joints.

Cartilage in joints ulcerates from inflammation, and often becomes
entirely destroyed.

The bones, like other parts of the body, are subject to inflamma-
tion ; and when fractured, it is by this process that their union is
effected. Suppuration, ulceration, and mortification, or the death of
the bone, also attack this structure ; thus you see that, like other parts
of the body, it is subject to the different processes of inflammation.

Serous membranes, when inflamed, are remarkably disposed to pass
into the adhesive inflammation ; whilst mucous membranes, on the con-
trar y, generally go into the suppurative state. Mr. Hunter made several



i



10



ON INFLAMMATION.



experiments to confirm these facts, which have been verified by later
physiologists.

Inflammation may be of the healthy or unhealthy kind. No wound
can be restored without the former ; even the small puncture made in
bleeding would inevitably destroy life, were it not for this salutary
principle ; a slight inflammatory action throws out upon the edges of
the wound adhesive lymph, by which they become permanently united.
When a ligature is put upon a large artery, unless inflammation super,
veiled, no good effect would be produced. The first thing nature does
in this case is, to form a clot of blood at that part of the vessel where it
has been tied ; inflammation supervenes, adhesive matter is thrown out,
by which the internal coats of the artery become firmly glued together,
and hemorrhage prevented. If the constitution be in an unhealthy
condition, this process will not be effected ; so that when the ligature
comes off, the person may die of hemorrhage. Inflammation, without
any obvious cause, is generally of the unhealthy kind, and arises from
irritability of the constitution, and an enfeebled state of the affected
part.



LECTURE III.

ACUTE AND CHRONIC INFLAMMATION.

Inflammation is of two kinds, Acute and Chronic. The first usu-
ally goes through its various stages with great rapidity, while the latter
is exceedingly slow in its progress, and is either the result of acute in-
flammation, or owing to a peculiar state of constitution, occurring in
persons who have lived intemperately, or who have been exposed to
excessive and laborious exertion, or who are the victims of anxiety and
disappointment.

Acute Inflammation — One of the best examples of acute inflamma-
tion is seen in the breast after delivery. The adhesive stage is marked
by hardness and pain ; the suppurative, by irritative fever, fluctuation,
and throbbing or pulsation ; laceration usually succeeds in a short space
of time, and the matter is soon discharged.

Chronic Inflammation . — A good example of acute inflammation,
terminating in chronic, is observable in ophthalmia. When consulted
in cases of this description, during the acute stage of inflammation, you
must bleed both locally and generally. This may be done either by
opening a vein in the arm, by the application of leeches to the temples
and palpebra, or by opening the temporal artery, which sometimes re-
lieves from its free anastomoses with the ocular arteries. You should






I



ON INFLAMMATION. 19

use such applications as will soothe and allay the local irritation, and
these should consist of narcotic and emollient fomentations. When
by these means the acute inflammation ends, the chronic frequently be-
gins. In the first, our object is to diminish power ; in the second, it is
necessary to stimulate the vessels, to contract their diameters, to lessen
the quantity of blood which has accumulated in them, and thus restore
them to their natural state. This is best effected by astringent and
stimulating lotions, as the solutions of alum, sulphate of zinc, nitrate of
silver ; and as the system of depletion required during the acute stage
may have produced debility, the use of tonics must not be forgotten.

An instance of chronic inflammation succeeding the acute may be
seen in gonorrhoea. During the first stages of this complaint, we are
obliged to check the action of the vessels of the urethra, but afterwards
to excite it by the balsam of copabai, and slightly stimulating in-
jections.

COMMON, OR SPECIFIC INFLAMMATION.

Inflammation is of two kinds, either common or specific.

The first, with its terminations, has been already described, and is
called healthy inflammation. But the second, or specific, is of a pecu-
liar kind, and is called unhealthy. In this inflammation, the vessels
have an entirely different action to what happens in the healthy state,
and thus the fluids and solids they secrete have a decidedly opposite
character.

There are two descriptions of specific inflammation : the first is pro-
duced by a peculiar condition of the constitution ; and the second, by
the application of a poison.

Gout is an example of the first kind. If a man for a length of time
yield to every injurious excess, loading his stomach with food and wine,
so as to weaken the digestive powers, he probably excites in his system
what is called the gouty disposition ; he experiences dreadful pain in
one or more of his toes, &c., and severe inflammation ensues, which
frequently terminates in the secretion of a matter that speedily becomes
solid, usually called chalk-stone ; this name, however, is incorrect, as it
has been proved by the analysis of Dr. Wollaston to consist of uric acid
and soda, consequently is now very properly named urate or lithate
of soda.

The formation of scirrhus or cancer is another example of specific
inflammation, arising from a peculiar state of constitution. Let us sup-
pose that two women receive each a blow on the breast ; one woman
with a constitution in a healthy, vigorous state, and the other with a
system predisposed to the formation of cancer ; in the first individual
the inflammation will be strictly healthy, going through its different



20



ON INFLAMMATION.



stages until a cure is accomplished ; in the other person, owing to a
constitutional peculiarity, the same extent of injury will produce can-
cerous disease, a malady over which medicine has no influence, and
extirpation is only an uncertain remedy. Persons afflicted with can-
cerous or fungous complaints are of exceedingly anxious minds (at least
nine times in ten) ; this anxiety occasions a sort of irritable fever, which
invariably proves detrimental.

But the best example of specific inflammation is scrofula. Persons
attacked by this disease have generally light hair, fair complexion, deli-
cate appearance ; when inflammation occurs, it is slow in its progress,
although easily excited ; and at last, ulceration taking place, the dis-
charge consists of curdy matter, or a thin serous fluid, not at all resem-
bling the pus which is formed in healthy inflammations.

The second kind of specific inflammation is caused by the application
of poisons. Thus, in gonorrhoea, the matter secreted is widely different
from common healthy matter, having, in the first place, a much larger
quantity of mucus mixed with it ; and secondly, when applied to a
secreting surface, is capable of exciting in the part an action by which
similar matter and the same effects can be produced. The matter of
small-pox occasions the same results, and as far as constitutional effects
are concerned, it does not seem material how large or how small a quan-
tity of the poison is applied, the result in each case depending upon the
state of the constitution.

There is another kind of inflammation which I would call the irrita-
ble ; in this disorder the nerves are much more affected than the blood-
vessels. You are called probably to attend a person, who tells you that
he feels in a particular part, as the hand or arm, a most agonizing pain :
and if inexperienced in these matters, you will be inclined to doubt the
correctness of your patient’s statement, and the more so as you can dis-
cover no alteration in the appearance of the part. It may not be amiss
to mention here what happened to me some time ago. I was requested
to see a lady having this complaint in her foot : I tried, by every possi-
ble means, to remove it, but in vain. When unsuccessful, I invariably
recommended the sufferer to some one else. This lady consulted two other
very eminent surgeons, but their efforts, in like manner, were unable to
afford relief ; and finding that she got worse in town, she went into the
country for change of air, where, without any medical means being
employed, she entirely got rid of her troublesome companion. I saw
this lady afterwards, and she described the pain that she used to feel as
horrible ; it was constantly at the bottom of herfoot ; and if she walked
but a very short distance, it occasioned a confinement during four or five
days.



ON INFLAMMATION.



2 ]



The eyes are very subject to this torturing disorder. But no pans
are more frequently attacked by it than the breasts of young women. It
produces such a degree of tenderness that they cannot bear the slightest
pressure, and their stays consequently occasion great inconvenience ; the
pain extends to the shoulder, down the arm, and even to the elbow, at
the sametime producing constitutional irritation. To cure these pains
and general derangement, such medicines must be given as will influence
the secretions, but more particularly those of the uterus.

The irritable inflammation frequently attacks the testicles, and ren-
ders them exceedingly sensitive, the slightest pressure causing very great
pain. There is in these cases little or no alteration of size ; if any dif-
ference, the affected one is the smallest. In three instances I have been
obliged to remove testicles for this disease. The subject of one of these
cases was a gentleman from South Carolina : he came to England for
advice, and went the whole round of medical men, without experiencing
any alleviation of his sufferings. He then desired me to remove the
torturing part ; this was done, and the gentleman went back to his native
country quite well. I heard, that soon after his return he got married,
and am happy to say, that his lady had a child.

The bladder is also very commonly disordered by this irritable inflam-
mation, and the symptoms, in many respects, resemble those of stone —
in both cases there is pain in making water, and the urine is frequently
mixed with blood. The grand difference in the two cases is this : the
irritable bladder is most painful when the organ is full ; the bladder
that contains a stone, when it is empty. Upon dissection, the inner coat
of an irritable bladder has been seen the colour of red velvet. I have
known this irritable inflammation attack the rectum, and produce
excessive suffering, which was relieved by large doses of soda. Soda,
rhubarb, and the compound powder of ipecacuanha, are the best
remedies.

Inflammation sometimes arises from debility, and this state is fre-
quently seen in the lower extremities of old persons, in whom the blood
returns to the heart with difficulty. From this weakened power, the
arteries are called upon for unusual exertion, and inflammation of the
skin succeeds, frequently attended with incrustations, a serious dis-
charge, and sometimes with a watery secretion into the cellular tissue.

Irritable persons are much more predisposed to inflammation than
others, and when it occurs to them it is of a more dangerous nature than
in those who are not irritable. Thus in fevers, when the constitution
has been much weakened, the parts on which the body has been resting
become inflamed, and quickly mortify. But in fractures, where the sys-
tem is healthy and strong, although the patient remain many weeks in



22



ON INFLAMMATION.



bed, no such effects are produced. Where there is great irritation, inflam-
mation is always dangerous ; and the application of a blister to the chest,
for the removal of a cough after measles, frequently, in this town,
destroys it by bringing on mortification. Mercury, in like manner, by
rendering the body irritable, disposes it to inflammation ; and it is
wrong to operate on a patient immediately after a mercurial course, on
account of this inflammatory tendency.

The exciting causes of inflammation are whatever produces an unna-
tural state of the part, calling upon nature for its reparation, which she
effects by the process of inflammation, as bruises, warts, pressure, extra-
neous substances, &c. &c. The manner in which nature repairs these
injuries will be more fully explained hereafter.

Proximate Causes of Inflammation . — With regard to these there has
been, and still is, much difference of opinion. Boerhaave’s opinion, of
an obstruction in the smaller vessels, arising from the thickness of the
blood, is false — for, instead of being thicker, it is absolutely thinner.
Cullen’s theory, of spasm in the extreme vessels, is equally erroneous.
These are the results of opinion not founded upon observation. We
should observe first, and think afterwards. The true proximate causes
of inflammation appear to be an increase of action in the vessels of the
part, and an increase in the size of the vessels themselves. These phe-
nomena are well demonstrated by the following experiment; viz.
Stretch the web of a frog’s foot, and place it under a good microscope,
and put on it the smallest drop of nitric acid, or prick a spot with a
pin : you will soon perceive in the vicinity of the irritated part consi-
derable agitation, and presently a red particle of blood will make its
appearance in a vessel that had previously been the receptacle of trans-
parent serum only — each pulsation pushing it on farther and farther.
This red particle distends the vessel, and is succeeded by others passing
freely into the vein. All the vessels of the part then take on similar ac-
tions ; and thus you create under your eye, speaking figuratively, mean-
dering rivulets of blood. The dilation of the vessels in inflammation is
not, however, confined to thepart itself, but is also observable in the larger
arteries leading to the scene of irritation : thus, in persons who have
died, having inflammation in a foot, the femoral artery on the affected
side has been found larger than the opposite. I before explained the
manner in which nature throws a quantity of blood to a part for the
purpose of repairing an injury, or for the removal of irritation ; I will
give another illustration of this, which, if you have not seen, most pro-
bably all of you have felt. It is this : when any offending matter gets
under the eyelids it produces irritation ; — nature immediately sends a
quantity of blood to the lachrymal gland — this blood occasions a secre-



TREATMENT OF INFLAMMATION.



23



tion of tears, and these are directed in streams over the eye, for the pur-
pose of washing oft' the offending substance.

[Sir Astley then stated, that he would show a beautiful specimen of
fungus hiEinatodes. The tumour was of very large size, and, when cut
open, exhibited the usual characteristics of this malignant disease ; viz.
cysts filled by a transparent fluid, extravasated blood in clots, some of
its parts were whitish, while others were very dark, and the whole was
of a spongy, elastic texture.]



LECTURE IV.

TREATMENT OF INFLAMMATION.

This is either constitutional, local, or both combined. When any im-
portant organ is injured, or its functions disturbed in consequence of
the influence of the injury on the constitution, the treatment must be
invariably constitutional, let the local be whatever it may ; for no vital
organ can be disturbed in its functions without producing general de-
rangement, which will be, more or less, in proportion to the importance
of the part wounded, and the extent of the wound. Inflammation, how-
ever, in many persons, requires constitutional treatment, whether any
important part be injured or not ; as, in irritable habits, where very
trivial local damage will speedily affect the entire system.

The most powerful means of relieving inflammation is by the abstrac-
tion of blood. Its beneficial effects principally result from producing a
diminution of nervous power ; and that it does accomplish this is
proved by the syncope which it occasions. Thus, often the removal of
a very small quantity of blood even causes a suspension of the mental
faculties, as well as of all the voluntary functions. Fainting, however,
cannot be suddenly produced, unless the patient be in the erect po-
sition at the time the blood is drawn : for it is the loss of this fluid
by the vessels of thebrain which is the immediate cause of fainting. To
prove this, when you next bleed a man until he faints, place him in the
recumbent posture, and let his head be situated a little lower than his
body, to facilitate the return of blood to the brain ; in a very short time
after being thus placed he will open his eyes, and all his faculties will
resume their former abode.

The second mode by which bleeding relieves is by lessening the quan-
tity of blood ; for when there is much fulness of the vessels, the mo-
mentum will necessarily be great, and consequently the vital fluid will
be thrown with greater power, not only to the inflamed, but to every
other part of the body.



24



TREATMENT OF INFLAMMATION.

The third mode by which bleeding proves serviceable, is by facili-
tating the re-establishment of the secreting functions.

The indication for bleeding is a hard pulse. In this state of the pulse
the diameter of the vessel is diminished, yet the action is exceedingly
strong, and each pulsation of the artery feels like the vibration of a wire ;
whenever, therefore, you find this description of pulse, you will be jus-
tified in taking away blood.

The hardest pulse that I ever met with, was in a person who had in-
flammation of the heart ; in inflammation of the lungs and of the brain
the pulse is hard, but not to be compared to this. The pulse, however,
is not always hard when inflammation attacks important parts. The con-
trary is sometimes the fact ; for, when the stomach or intestines is thus
affected, the pulse is scarcely discoverable. Persons, unacquainted with
the nature of this fact, are frightened at seeing a man frequently bled,
who has, for example, strangulated hernia, and will often exclaim,
“ Pray don’t bleed him any more, see how pale he is, and his pulse is
almost gone.” Well then, recollect, that in inflammation of theabdo-
minal viscera the pulse is feeble ; but inflammation of the liver, how-
ever, is an exception to this rule.

Quickness of pulse is not in itself a sufficient proof that bleeding is
requisite, but when united with hardness, no additional evidence of its
necessity can be wanted ; therefore, never bleed where there is a quick
pulse, unless at the same time it be a hard one. The indication for a
repetition of blood-letting is said to be a buffy state of the blood, but
your decision must not be governed by this appearance, you must still
have a hard pulse. When blood is cupped it is said to be a proof of
strength, and that bleeding should be repeated; the following case,
however, will show that even a cupped state of the blood and buffiness
conjoined are not sufficient evidence to warrant a conclusion that vene-
section may be repeated. A man at Guy’s Hospital, in the last state
of scurvy, and whose blood-vessels were so weak that a very slight pres-
sure upon the skin produced ecchymosis — whose gums bled frequently,
and whose pulse was exceedingly feeble and quick — had taken from his
arm, at my request, a very small quantity of blood, by way of experi-
ment ; after standing for a few hours, it became not only buffy, but ex-
ceedingly cupped. When, therefore, you employ bleeding, it may be
of importance to you to keep this experiment in your remembrance.

The quantity of blood which should be drawn at a time, in inflamma-
tion, must depend entirely on the severity of the complaint.

The proportion of blood, compared with the solids, which can be
drawn from an animal before it dies, is about one pound to sixteen. I
ascertained this fact in the following manner : — I took a small dog,



TREATMENT OF INFLAMMATION.



25



weighing fourteen pounds, and opened his jugular vein ; in this way
eleven ounces were discharged, when the dog fainted. I then opened
the carotid artery, and from this source obtained three ounces more. Thus
fourteen ounces of blood were drawn from a dog weighing fourteen
pounds ; so that one ounce of blood to sixteen ounces of the solids is
about the correct proportion.

When you bleed to relieve inflammation, the blood should be ab-
stracted as rapidly as possible ; therefore the orifice made into the ves-
sel should be of considerable size; for, if it be allowed to run slowly,
the vessels have time to accommodate themselves to the diminished
volume of circulating fluid ; so that the system scarcely receives any
shock when blood is abstracted in this gradual manner. The grand ob-
ject, indeed, is, to produce fainting ; to effect which, blood must be
suddenly withdrawn.

You may bleed so as to produce constitutional and local effects at the
same time. A patient of Mr. Foster’s in Guy’s Hospital, who had a
concussion of the brain, was bled in the external jugular vein ; imme-
diately after the operation, the pain of the head ceased, and the irritable
fever disappeared.

When you have accidents brought to you which will require a long
time for their recovery, you must be exceedingly careful how you take
away blood from the general system, but must adopt in these cases local
depletion ; for if, as I have before remarked, you take away from the
constitution too much of the vital fluid, nature will be unable to exe-
cute the usual processes for the restoration of the injured parts ; the
most disastrous consequences, in such cases, follow the indiscriminate
employment of blood-letting ; and there is not to be found, in the whole
range of surgical practice, a greater error than this.

The second mode of relieving inflammation is by restoring the secre-
tions : for whenever it occurs, at least in any violent degree, all the
secretions are diminished or suppressed. The most important secretions
are those of the liver, intestines, skin, and kidneys ; and, when these
cease to perform their proper functions, irritative fever is the conse-
quence. A deficiency of secretion in the alimentary canal is the cause
of a great many of the diseases to which human beings are subject.
The internal surface of the intestines is lined with glands ; the tube
itself, on an average, is twenty-seven feet in length, and three inches in
circumference ; thus there are here about a thousand inches of surface,
from which, in health, continual secretion proceeds. What then must
the result be of allowing such an extensive surface to remain inactive i
Of course, the production and continuance of irritation and fever ! To
excite the intestinal canal to action, therefore, should be one of our first

D



26



TREATMENT OF INFLAMMATION.



objects. This may be done by purgatives ; and they afford relief in
nearly the same manner as the abstraction of blood from the arm ; for a
pint of serum will frequently pass off with feculent matter, after taking
a cathartic. Purgatives have likewise another good effect, independently
of restoring the secretions from the intestinal tube, viz. that of carrying
off whatever feculent matter may be lodged in the intestines ; but I do
not believe that much irritation is produced by the accumulation of
fteces in comparison with that which takes place from a stoppage or de-
ficiency of the secretions. I have met with several cases in which a vast
quantity of faeces had collected, yet little constitutional irritation was
produced; similar cases frequently come under the observation of
accoucheurs. In one instance, which I met with, the pressure from
the faeces was so violent that it produced ulceration into the vagina ; yet
the amazing quantity of feculent matter excited but little constitutional
irritation. Some fluid formed a passage by the condensed mass, and
was daily discharged ; this, in a great measure, accounts for the absence
of irritative fever.

That it is from the check to the secretions that irritative fever arises,
is proved by what happens to children during dentition. They are some-
times put to bed quite well, but in the morning half the body is para-
lysed from the irritation of a tooth. The secretion from the intestines
stops, fever is excited, which produces a hot and dry skin ; but restore
these secretions, by the administration of purgatives and antimonials,
and the irritative fever soon subsides, although the paralysis will some-
times continue, with little alteration for life.

There is another mode in which purgatives produce a beneficial effect
in inflammation, that of irritating the intestines. Blood is determined
to them, and is therefore drawn from the part inflamed, upon the princi-
ple that two increased actions are with difficulty kept up in the body at
the same time.

It is of no use to act on the intestines in inflammation, without also
exciting the liver; therefore, give calomel with your saline medicines,
but do not give saline alone ; the best plan is to give calomel at night,
and a saline in the morning. An excellent aperient for adults is one grain
of calomel, with four of cathartic extract ; or two of blue pill, with three
of cathartic extract. Castor oil may also be recommended ; and, as
another safe opening medicine, you may prescribe infusion of senna,
with Epsom salts. In children, calomel, with rhubarb, scammony, or
antimony, may be ordered as aperients : and in addition to these means,
the use of injections, and the warm bath, are the best means of restor-
ing the secretions of the digestive organs.

An old Scotch physician, for whom I had a great respect, and whom



TREATMENT OF INFLAMMATION.



27



I frequently met in the city, used to say to me, as we were about to
enter our patient’s room together, “ Weel Mister Cooper, we ha’ only
twa things to keep in meend, and they’ll searve us for here and here-
after ; one is auways to ha’ the fear o’ th’ Lord before our een, that ’ll
do for hereafter; and t’other is to keep our booels auways open, and
that ’ll do for here.”

The methods by which I preserve my own health are, temperance,
early rising, and sponging the body every morning with cold water im-
mediately after getting out of bed, a practice which I have adopted for
thirty years ; and though I go from the hot theatre into the squares of
the hospital, in the severest winter nights, with merely silk stockings
on my legs, yet I scarcely ever have a cold. Should it happen that I
feel indisposed, my never-failing remedy is one grain of calomel com-
bined with four of cathartic extract, which I take at night ; with a basin
of hot tea, about two hours before I rise the following morning, in order
to excite a free perspiration, and my indisposition soon subsides.

The next secretion we should restore, for relieving irritation and in-
flammation, is that of the skin, for it rarely happens that a hard pulse
continues with a free secretion from the surface of the body.

The best mode of producing perspiration is, by giving the antimo-
nial powder with diluents, or Dover’s powder ; as this powder, how-
ever, is apt to increase costiveness, the antimonials are the best, and
these should be combined with mercurials.

The other secretion, namely that of the kidneys, may be restored by
giving diluents, squills, or acetate of potash.

Now, gentlemen, be assured it is not by restoring this or that secre-
tion, which will relieve extensive inflammation ; for it cannot be effected
but by the complete restoration of them all.

There are some cases of inflammation where bleeding will not afford
relief ; this more frequently happens in inflammation of the testicles
than in any other part ; for these affections you must administer Dover’s
powder, combined with calomel.

There is another mode of subduing inflammation, namely, provoking
in the stomach a constant nausea, by giving a solution of emetic tartar.
I have seen this plan successfully practised on children in croup ; calo-
mel should be also occasionally administered.

In inflammation of old people you must bleed with great caution. I
was requested to see an elderly lady in the country, having inflamed
lungs; I ordered her to be bled — the bleeding was repeated, when her
legs began to swell ; I therefore prescribed the digitalis and the spir.
teth. nitrici ; it reduced the pulse, caused the absorption of the effused

D 2



28



TREATMENT OF CHRONIC



fluid in the legs, and she rapidly recovered. This medicine reduced the
inflammation, and at the same time increased power.

The means, therefore, which are employed to lessen or remove in-
flammation are those which restore the secretions, by opening the extre-
mities of the arteries ; and thus the heart is prevented from propelling
a quantity of blood with violence to any particular part of the body.



LECTURE V.

Tit EAT ME NT OF CHRONIC INFLAMMATION.

The remedies employed in this affection must have a slow and gradual
action on the secretions, you cannot take this disease by storm ; and if
your medicines are attended by violent actions, you will do harm instead
of good. The principle on which this disease depends is the same as in
acute inflammation, viz. the arrest of the secretions. Chronic inflamma-
tion is frequently produced through the influence of the mind : thus,
long-continued grief will completely stop the secretion of bile ; again,
loss of appetite, from a deficient secretion of gastric juice, is often occa-
sioned by anxiety of mind ; and even an ulcerated state of the stomach
has been produced by a long continuance of the same cause. But let
what will cause the stoppage of the secretion, some enlargement will be
the result ; as swelling of the liver, of the testicles, or of the joints ; the
formation of common tumours, as the fatty, or those of a specific kind,
as the fungous.

In diseases of a chronic kind, give calomel and opium ; and I cannot
point out to you a better example of their good effects than is observable
in chronic inflammation of the iris. A person comes into the hospital
with iritis ; and he has a zone of red vessels round the cornea, on the scle-
rotic coat, and there are red or yellow spots on the iris ; if the complaint
has been violent, the spots are red, from their having become vascular.
You give this patient five grains of calomel, and one grain of opium,
twice a-day for a fortnight, and he generally gets well. Yet this disease
was formerly considered incurable. If the patient be a female, or of a
delicate constitution, then two or three grains of calomel will be found
sufficient ; and when the mouth becomes decidedly affected, you will
perceive an alteration in the appearance of the iris, when you should les-
sen your dose ; a profuse salivation is not necessary, and, if long con-
tinued, would aggravate rather than relieve the local disease.

The most common medicine, and probably as a general one the best
that is administered in chronic inflammation, is Plummer's pill ; it



INFLAMMATION.



2.9



acts at one and the same time on the secretions of the liver, intestines
and skin, and if you can succeed in restoring these, the disease, if re-
cent will soon disappear ; the absorbent vessels are roused into a state
of increased activity, and the effects of the chronic inflammation are
removed.

Another excellent medicine for the cure of chronic complaints is the
oxymuriate of mercury, combined with the compound decoction of sar-
saparilla. In the hospitals we merely give it dissolved in rectified spi-
rits of wine ; about one-eighth of a grain, in half apint of the decoction,
to be taken in the course of a day ; one-half in the morning, and the
other in the evening ; continue it as long as you think necessary, taking
care to watch its effects on the gums ; always keeping in mind, that
mercury given to excess will tend to increase, rather than destroy con-
stitutional irritation. As sarsaparilla seems to possess the power of
lessening irritability, we frequently give it with mercury, in the way I
have just mentioned ; it is a medicine which often has a most extraor-
dinary effect on opacities of the cornea, and may be prescribed, in even
very bad cases, with the greatest prospect of success. A girl from
Sheerness was in Guy’s Hospital some time since, in whom the opacity
was so great, that she was nearly blind ; quite so in one eye : the usual
remedies employed in similar cases were tried, without obtaining the least
benefit; she was then recommended the compound decoction of sarsa-
parilla, with the oxymuriate of mercury, and in a short time she reco-
vered her sight.

The best alterative for the removal of chronic disorders in children,
is one grain of the hydrarg. cum creta, and two or three grains of pow-
dered rhubarb, mixed together, and given night and morning : this
compound is exceedingly mild, and will have a particularly benign in-
fluence on the liver and intestines. One grain of oxymuriate of mer-
cury, dissolved in an ounce of tincture of bark, and from ten to fifteen
drops, according to the age of the child, being given twice a day, will
likewise be found a very valuable medicine. It is said, that the mer-
cury is decomposed by the bark ; but whether it be so or not, it is at-
tended with so many good effects, that I shall continue to prescribe it ;
and especially in those cases where there is enlargement of the mesen-
teric glands. Calomel and rhubarb, the liydr. cum creta, and soda,
will also be found medicines of much power in the chronic diseases of
children.

Lastly, as it is not advisable to give these little creatures mercury,
if it can be avoided, a medicine, composed of two grains of rhubarb,
and five grains of the carbonate of iron, given two or three timesa.day.



30



LOCAL TREATMENT



will often render its employment unnecessary ; this medicine acts as an
aperient and powerful tonic.

The nature of inflammation I hope you all now thoroughly under-
stand : recollect that the vessels of the part are in a dilated state, and
the surrounding ones have an increased action.

I shall next speak of the

LOCAL TREATMENT OP INFLAMMATION.

Much has been said about the application of cold in these affections.
People have been arguing about words rather than ideas, but it really is
not worth while to attend to such fastidious, nonsensical objections, as
have been started against this remedy. Though cold is not a positive
agent, yet it is capable of affording great relief in inflammation — first, by
lessening the size of the vessels — secondly, by lessening action, which it
effects by diminishing nervous irritability. If cold be applied to the
system generally, it has the power of lessening the frequency of the pulse
in an extraordinary degree. I have tried this upon myself. I went
out of my house one evening into the garden when warm, my pulse
being 80; at the expiration of an hour it was 76 ; at the end of two
hours was reduced to 65 ; and had not only lessened in quickness, but
also in fulness. Cold will produce torpor, and even death.

A curious instance of this kind occurred near Halifax, in Nova
Scotia : Dr. Scott had been dining a little way in the country with some
friends, and they were on their return at night, when one of the party
separated from the rest, saying to a companion, that he w ould frighten
some of them by-and-by. However, they reached Halifax without
seeing any thing more of him. At this the party became alarmed
for his safety, and returned for the purpose of finding him. He w r as
discovered behind a hillock of snow, in an erect position, but quite dead.

Another curious instance of this kind is related in Cook’s Voyages,
when some of the officers and crew of one of the ships were landing at
Terra del Fuego. Dr. Solander, who was of the party, particularly
cautioned them not to go to sleep ; and said that it was exceedingly
dangerous to do so in cold situations. It happened, however, that the
Doctor was himself the first who became drowsy ; it ivas with the
greatest difficulty that his companions could keep him in motion : and
it was only by the utmost perseverance that they succeeded in getting
him back to the ship alive.

When cold is applied to an inflamed part, it lessens its nervous energy,
and robs it of its heat ; but cold must be severe indeed, if it brings the
internal parts of the body below a temperature of 98 deg. In this coun-



01'’ INFLAMMATION.



31



try, in the winter, many of the external parts of the body vary in tem-
perature from 20 to 30 deg. ; thus a thermometer applied to the toes
when they are cold, will be found to indicate 20 deg. of heat less than
it would do, if applied to the calf of the leg. Cold, applied in excess,
destroys life, by abstracting heat, without which the vital actions cannot
be supported. ,

On the living body you may apply cold to a part until it actually be-
comes frozen. Mr. Cline and Mr. Sharp were once attending a patient
who had strangulated hernia ; to reduce which they applied ice inclosed
in linen cloths, and this they continued for thirty-six hours : now as
the ice dissolved, the water formed by it ran down upon the man’s
groin, and the inner side of his thigh, and the parts whereon this stream
passed, became completely frozen ; proper applications restored them
to life ; but inflammation and slight mortification succeeded: the hernia,
however, was reduced* and the man eventually did well. In similar
cases I advise you to apply ice in a bladder ; and take care that you do
not continue it too long.

It frequently happens in this country, during severe winters, that the
lobes of the ears and tips of the noses of those who are much exposed to
the weather will become frozen ; they may be restored to life by rubbing
them with snow.

One of the best lotions that can be applied to an inflamed part is com-
posed of one ounce of rectified spirits of wine, and five ounces of water.
Goulard water is much extolled for reducing inflammation and lessen-
ing pain ; but when too long applied, or too strong, it has been known
to destroy nervous irritability in too great a degree. Mr. Foster, of
Guy’s, saw a person in whom the upper eyelid became completely para-
lysed from its improper application.

In applying the spirit-of-wine lotion, let your cloths be thin, so that
the spirit may combine with the heat of the part, and carry it off in the
form of vapour ; in other words, evaporation is produced, and it is in
that way its good effects are evinced.

I do not recommend the application of ice to parts while in a state of
inflammation ; it irritates, and is apt to produce gangrene.

Some years since, when I was making a series of physiological expe-
riments, I wished to ascertain what effects would be produced upon the
pulse by the sudden application of severe cold, for which purpose I
plunged my arm to the shoulder into snow ; at the time of the immer-
sion my pulse wa3 80, but immediately rose to 120; this result was
contrary to all that I had ever been taught on the subject — the pulse
sometimes did not rise so high as 120, not being more than 110, and
was hard and wiry. The immersion in so great a degree of cold caused



32



LOCAL TREATMENT



great pain, and consequently was a source of irritation. This experi-
ment led me into an examination of the effects of the application of the
cold bath ; I found, that when a person in health took a cold bath, who
was unaccustomed to do so, that it produced irritation ; but on the con-
trary, when a person in a state of irritation, or febrile heat, went into
a cold bath, it tranquilized the nervous action, and exerted a beneficial
influence.

At one time, I had injured my health by being too much in the dis-
secting-room, and was in the habit of discharging from my stomach a
good deal of blood ; a considerable degree of sympathetic fever was the
consequence ; in this condition I went into the country, for the benefit
of a pure atmosphere, and there had frequent opportunities of noticing
the influence of cold upon an irritable pulse, in my own person. Of an
evening, when in the house, my pulse would be at 120, but upon going
out into the cold air, it sunk in a very short time to 100, and by a long
continuance in the cold, it became still less frequent. Thus, where there
is great irritability of the nervous system, and where the heart is sending
its blood through the different channels with accelerated motion, cold
will prove invigorating, by destroying the first of these affections, and
reducing the latter to the natural standard.

In a word, therefore, cold relieves inflammation when locally applied
— by abstracting heat — by lessening the diameter of the blood-vessels —
and by diminishing the action of the part, through lessening its nervous
irritability.

The next mode of relieving inflammation is by the application of
heat and moisture : this looks like contradiction, but it is not so. It
would be a contradiction to apply heat alone, and its application would
certainly do harm ; but the reverse is the result, when united with
moisture ; for the two produce relaxation, open the pores, gives rise to
perspiration, thereby removing congestion, and occasioning all the be-
neficial effects that would arise from the application of leeches. The
sedative effects of heat and moisture are well exemplified by what hap-
pens when a person takes a warm bath ; a man, for instance, with a
pulse at 75, goes into water heated to 100 deg., his pulse soon rises to
100, presently he perspires freely, his pulse becomes less frequent, yet
soft; great relaxation follows, and if he were not removed, he would
absolutely die, so extensive is the exhaustion that it occasions. Here,
then, is a direct proof of what heat and moisture can do, when they are
applied generally ; and, when used locally, their action on the parts is
precisely the same.

Fomentations are ordered precisely with the same view, viz. to restore
the secretions of the part, by which the tension of the vessels is removed,



OF INFLAMMATION.



33



anil the pain much abated. Fomentations occasionally are medicated,
being composed of camomile flowers, poppy-heads, &c., but I do not
consider that these possess any advantage over mere water, at least where
the surface of the skin is unbroken.

Poultices are likewise used upon the same principle; the kind of
poultice is of little consequence, provided, as in the preceding case, the
skin be entire.

The next method of relieving inflammation is by the application of
leeches, which relieve upon the same principle as poultices and fomen-
tations, viz. by abstracting from the part a portion of its fluids, and con-
sequently lessening the pain and tension : after the leeches drop off, the
bleeding must be encouraged ; this may be done by bathing the part
with warm water, and wiping it frequently with a warm sponge.

To some persons, and in some situations, however, the application of
leeches is attended with very great inconvenience ; as occasionally, for
example, in inflammation of the testicles. We do not find this an in-
convenience in the hospitals; but frequently, in private practice, we
see persons in whom it is of the greatest consequence that a bleeding
from these parts should be concealed. Now, as there is much mess,
trouble, and consequent exposure, from an application of leeches, what
we do in such cases is this : we request the person to stand before us,
and, with a lancet, puncture some of the small veins on the front of the
scrotum ; in this manner, and with a little warm water, you abstract
any portion of blood you wish ; and what is of very great consequence,
you stop it when you please; for, by placing the patient in a recum-
bent posture, and by applying some cold water to the punctures, the
blood will immediately cease to flow. In this way, then, you may take,
blood from the scrotum, when the testicles are inflamed, with very little
trouble, and without any exposure.

[The learned Lecturer here said, at the same time putting his hand
upon one of the recently amputated stumps lying upon the table, that he
had a few more remarks to make, but these would be on another sub-
ject : viz. — the occasional retraction of the skin of a stump, after am-
putation.

A surgeon, at Worthing, took off a boy’s arm, pretty near the
shoulder -joint; the stump healed kindly, and all was thought to be
doing well : some months after, however, he complained of pain, and
the skin retracted to such an extent, that the bone projected through it
at least an inch ; in this state, he came to town, and upon examining
the part near the arm-pit, I put my finger upon a small tumour ; this
occasioned the boy to jump as though he had been electrified ; I then
performed the operation of amputation at the shoulder joint, and upon



34



COUNTER-IRRITATION



examination, it was found that the tumour which had been touched be-
fore the operation, and produced the electric shock, was a large ganglion
of nerves, and it had given rise to the excessive irritability of the stump,
and the retraction of the skin.

Previously to the above case, a boy was sent to me, with a stump
similar to the one I have just described, but in the leg ; the ends of the
bones were cut off, and the boy left the hospital apparently well ; but
soon after the arm case from Worthing had been operated upon, and the
nature of the disease ascertained, this boy again returned, having his
stump in a painful, irritable state, and the skin evidently retracted.
Knowing now the cause of the mischief, I cut down upon, and took out
the end of the posterior tibial nerve : the bad symptoms consequently
disappeared, and the lad eventually recovered.

Going round the hospital the other day, I met with another case re-
sembling the above, but, in point of irritability, much worse. At the
particular request of the woman, I amputated — the nerves appeared to
be enlarged, and had formed a ganglion partially resting on the extre-
mity of the bone ; this had produced such a degree of irritation, that no
part of the stump could be touched without exciting a kind of electric
shock; in fact, the woman appeared very much to resemble a sensi-
tive plant.

How the nerves become longer than the bones in these cases does
not admit of easy explanation.

LECTURE VI.

COUNTER-IRRITATION IN INFLAMMATION.

In the acute, as has already been explained to you, our object is to
diminish vascular action ; but in the chronic we endeavour to increase
it. Thus, in long-continued discharges arising from relaxation, we em-
ploy stimulating lotions, for the purpose of restoring to the vessels their
healthy power of contraction. Again, in sluggish, indolent ulcers, it
is absolutely necessary to excite action ; for which purpose we em-
ploy washes, either composed of calomel and lime-water, or the hydr.
oxymur. and lime-water; the cupri sulphas is also an admirable
remedy in these indolent sores. Gonorrhoea, as I have already shown
to you, gives us an excellent illustration of the difference between acute
inflammation and chronic, and the principles upon which your opposite
treatment must be founded to insure a successful result. At first you
diminish strength and action, and then stimulate, for the purpose of
restoring them.



IN INFLAMMATION.



35



Whenever you apply stimulating lotions to indolent ulcers, you
should always cover the parts with oiled silk, to prevent evaporation,
by which cold would be produced, and the design with which it was
applied frustrated. Your object here is to obtain heat and action ; as
oiled silk obstructs evaporation, it very materially contributes to create
these ; and, as the perspiration as well as the vapour from lotions con-
denses upon the inner surface of the oiled silk, it of course succeeds in
keeping the part moist ; and this is a very great advantage, as it ena-
bles you to remove your applications without disturbing the new skin.
Now, where this covering is not used, the linen over the wound be-
comes dry, adheres to the newly-formed skin, and, consequently, when
you take away one, the other must come with it : in this manner the
restorative efforts of nature for twenty-four hours will often be defeated
in a single minute.

The next method of treatment which we shall mention is that of
counter-irritation.

The power of this remedy is very great, and its advantages numerous ;
but the chief benefit that results from its employment arises from its
drawing off the blood from the neighbouring inflamed parts, whereby it
checks the course of disease in important organs : thus, a blister at the
nape of the neck, if early applied, will arrest an inflammation of the
brain ; a blister at the pit of the stomach will frequently overcome an
inflammation of that viscus ; a stimulating irritating lotion applied to
the scrotum will often cure an inflammation of the testicle. But
counter-irritation, carried to excess, will do harm ; you must, therefore,
be particularly cautious as to the manner in which you use it. In parts
that have no immediate connexion, it is really astonishing to observe its
effects. In inflammation of the lungs, a blister applied upon the chest
(parts between which there is no direct communication), will soon stop
the disease, and he to the patient the principal cause of recovery. Blis-
ters, likewise, applied to the front of the body, as on the abdomen, are
extremely useful for the removal of inflammations of the liver, in-
testines, &c.

Blisters are more generally used by surgeons for exciting counter-
irritation than any other application. Issues and setons are also occa-
sionally adopted. I again caution you against exciting such a degree
of irritation as would affect the whole system : if you were to allow this
to happen, you would aggravate the original disease ; it must therefore
be limited, and kept within proper bounds. Sometimes, after the
blister has been removed, it may be deemed prudent to keep the wound
open ; this you can accomplish by removing the loose cuticle, and by
dressing the sore with savine ointment.






30 COUNTER-IRRITATION

Another mode of producing counter-irritation is by the application of
tartarized antimony made into an ointment. This is a very excellent
method, and is now very generally adopted. You must be careful,
however, on what surfaces you apply it, if you intend to excite irrita-
tion in a great degree ; as it is apt, permanently, to disfigure the skin.

I saw a young lady who had used it on the arm for a chronic inflam-
mation of the elbow joint. She was offended with her medical attend-
dants for having recommended its employment, as it left a scar near the
elbow which has since obliged her to wear long sleeves. Such a defect
you would not like to see in your sister or friend ; therefore, it is no-
thing more than right that you should endeavour to obviate its occur-
rence ; and this you may always do by proper attention.

The next circumstance to be attended to in the treatment of inflam-
mation is position. Medical men do not consider the human body as
an hydraulic machine; nor indeed is it so : but still the fluids of the
body are, in some measure, governed by the laws of gravity. Look at
the operation that I spoke of in the last lecture, for relieving inflamma-
tion of the testicle. If you puncture the veins in front of the scrotum,
and if the patient be in the erect position, blood will freely flow ; but
put him in a recumbent position, the stream will immediately cease;
though when the body is thus placed, the power of the heart is greater
than when in the erect position.

If, during the ensuing winter, I should be called to any of you having
inflammation in the hand, arising from punctures inflicted while dissect-
ing, I should immediately direct you to get an inclined plane made,
upon which I should order you to rest your hand as long as the inflam-
mation was at all violent.

It is equally necessary to attend to position in inflammation of the
leg. I must give you an example ; I was sent for, to see a gentleman
farmer in the neighbourhood of Rayleigh, in Essex, who for a long
time had been subject to a very severe inflammation in both his legs ;
they were exceedingly red and very much swollen, in a state threaten-
ing gangrene; the constitutional irritation was very great, and the
tongue covered with a brown fur. I found him with his legs in a tub
of water; I took out one of them, and it smoked excessively; I saw
there was no time to be lost, had him immediately placed upon a sofa,
and contrived to rest his legs upon the end of the sofa; consequently
they were raised considerably higher than his body ; the vessels soon
began to unload themselves, and the skin, in a short time, was evidently
less red than when taken out of the water. I then applied flannels
wrung out of warm water; these soon produced a very considerable
perspiration, by which the cellular membrane became unloaded, the



IN INFLAMMATION.



37



swelling much less, and the pain materially abated. He gradually re-
covered, and in six weeks was enabled to ride a considerable distance to
market.

The completest tyro in suTgery ought to know, that it would be folly
to attempt to cure extensive inflammation in a limb, if it were allowed
to continue in a depending position.

The next circumstance to be attended to in the treatment of inflam-
mation is rest; the necessity of which must be well known to you, as
all of you must have observed that exercise increases the action of the
heart, and, consequently, must be injurious in inflammation. To ob-
tain rest for an inflamed joint is one of our grand principles in the
treatment, and no good can be done without it : it is curious to observe
how nature herself directs this ; for where a joint is diseased, the
muscles which act upon that joint have lost their power : thus, if a man
has an inflammation of the wrist, and you put your hand into his and
desire him to squeeze it, you find that he cannot do so, or that the at-
tempt is exceedingly feeble. In inflammations of the joints of the lower
extremities, the muscles of the part in like manner lose their vigour.

Indurations frequently remain after inflammation has entirely ceased ;
these are to be got rid of by diminishing the circulation of the part, and
producing absorption by the following methods : —

Pressure has the power of exciting the action of the absorbents in an
extraordinary degree ; and you may produce it either by the use of rol-
lers or strapping.

Electricity too, is attended with similar effects : it acts strongly on
the absorbent system.

Mercury, likewise, does the same ; and, speaking generally, more
decidedly so than either of the other remedies I have mentioned.

When a man dies in our foul wards, for example, in a state of saliva-
tion, we find that the alveolar processes which contained the teeth have
been in a great measure absorbed.

Friction has of late years, got into great repute, for the cure of in-
durated and stiffened joints, occasioned by inflammation ; it was first
recommended by the late Mr. Grosvenor, of Oxford, a man of strong
mind, and who possessed a great share of common sense. This remedy
was his hobby ; and, like all other hobbies, it occasionally carried its
rider into the mire ; for Mr. Grosvenor sometimes would recommend
friction before the acute inflammation had terminated, consequently it
was productive of mischief rather than benefit ; in many instances, how-
ever, where judiciously employed, the most beneficial results have been
obtained.

Case — A gentleman in the neighbourhood of Nottingham, when

E



38



ADHESIVE INFLAMMATION.



shooting, received a severe injury to his knee ; after the violence of the
first inflammatory symptoms had terminated, there remained consider-
able swelling, stiffness, and induration ; for these he was attended by
Mr. Attenborough, an eminent surgeon, of Nottingham ; as the gen-
tleman did not get better, Mr. Attenborough sent him to town, and
here he for some time continued under my care and that of a physician ;
still the joint remained in the same state, and the means used were in-
adequate to afford relief. I advised him to go to Oxford, and consult
Mr. Grosvenor. This he did ; and as soon as Mr. Grosvenor saw him,
and heard that his limb had been kept quiet, he told him to walk to the
bottom of Christ Church Meadow, and then return and dine, which he
really did. Friction was used in this case w'ith the greatest success,
for, within six weeks after he went to Oxford, he called upon me in
town, quite recovered, and thanked me for recommending him to
Mr. Grosvenor.

Friction accelerates circulation and absorption ; and the way in which
Mr. Grosvenor recommends it to be done was, by applying both hands
to the joints, at the same time alternately moving them up and down.

The late Mr. Hey, of Leeds, a man whose mind was free from every
paltry prejudice, most eminent in his profession, and ever anxious for
truth, had a son who met with a serious injury to his ankle-joint ; after
trying all that he could to relieve it, he sent him to Mr. Grosvenor ; and
under his care, by the judicious application of friction, the actions of
the joint were completely restored.

ADHESIVE INFLAMMATION.

For a knowledge of this, we are indebted to that bright luminary of
our profession, the late Mr. John Hunter, a man who was abused, re-
viled, and laughed at, when living, by the very persons who, now that
they cannot any longer injure him, are ever loading his name with every
species of commendation and praise.

Adhesive inflammation is the process by which divided parts become
united.

Inflammation has a disposition to separate the blood into more parts
than usually occur when drawn from a person in health. In health, it
merely separates into serum and red particles ; but, when in a state of
inflammation, if, after being drawn, it be allowed to remain undisturbed,
it will separate into serum, red particles, and fibrin. The red particles,
together with some fibrin, will be found at the bottom of the vessel ; the
fibrin immediately on the top of the red particles, forming what is
called the buff of the blood : and the serum will occupy the surround-
ing space. The fibrin, having lost the red particles, contracts with



ADHESIVE INFLAMMATION.



39



great firmness, and when taken out almost resembles a piece of leather.
It has been said, that the adhesive matter is albumen ; but it has been
proved not to be so. Doctor Bostock, who was for several years at
Guy’s Hospital, took great pains to investigate its nature, and published
several papers on the subject in the Medico-Chirurgical Transactions :
he named it fibrin. Mr. Hunter called it coagulable lymph ; this cer-
tainly was not a good term to be applied to such a substance, for lymph
is expressive of, and relates to, water ; whereas, fibrin is not only a so-
lid, but an exceedingly firm one.

Some surfaces of the body are serous, while others are mucous. The
cellular membrane is one of the former, and usually exhales a fluid
somewhat resembling serum, but containing much less albumen. This
membrane is very liable to the adhesive inflammation. The vessels
that usually secrete the fluid just mentioned, when the part is inflamed,
pour out fibrin, which, becoming coagulated, produces the hardness
which we usually find in inflamed parts.

The peritoneum, a membrane which doubly encloses the intestines,
is a serous surface, often affected by the adhesive inflammation, which
occasions the two surfaces of this membrane to be firmly glued together.

But the part of all others the most subject to this kind of inflamma-
tion is the pleura, and we scarcely ever open a body without finding
upon its surface many unnatural adhesions.

The heart, in like manner, is often glued to the pericardium, so that
the space usually found between the two portions of membrane is obli-
terated.

Thus, then, it will be seen that the serous membranes readily take on
the adhesive inflammation, by which they become permanently attached
to each other, or to the adjacent parts ; this is a most beautiful and wise
provision of nature, for if the membranes of cavities, such as the pleura
and peritoneum, instead of the adhesive, were to receive and support the
suppurative inflammation, effusion and death would be the inevitable
consequences.

The mucous membranes, as the urethra, for example, are effected by
the suppurative inflammation. This is another of nature’s benevolent
and wise ordinances; for, had they been subject to the adhesive, the
outlets of our bodies would have become closed, and life destroyed.
Sometimes where inflammation of a mucous membrane is exceedingly
violent, it passes into the adhesive inflammation, glues the parts to-
gether, and, unless relieved by an operation, would end in the destruction
of life. I can relate to you an example of this : there was brought to
me from Exeter ’Change a kangaroo for dissection. His bed of straw
had caught fire, but it was very soon extinguished ; and the proprietor,

e 2



40



APPEARANCES UNDER



knowing that he had not been severely burned, was at a loss to account
for his death. Upon examination, his bladder was filled with urine,
which was retained in consequence of the closure of the urethra by the
adhesive inflammation ; the penis having been severely injured by the
fire, the inflammation which followed was violent, and passed at once
into the adhesive form. Thus you may perceive that common gonorr-
hoea would destroy life, if it were not so arranged by nature that mu-
cous membranes are more readily influenced by the suppurative than
by adhesive inflammation.

LECTURE VII.

APPEARANCES UN DER ADHESIVE INFLAMMATION.

When an incision is made into a part affected with adhesive inflam-
mation — into the cellular membrane, for instance — a quantity of serum
is found effused round the part, and in the part itself a yellow and
semitransparent substance, having the appearance of jelly, though
widely different from it in composition. The best opportunity that
you can have of witnessing the adhesive inflammation is on the skin
under the irritation of a blister; the blister produces the same effects
as those produced in the operation for hydrocele. Let a blister be ap-
plied for twenty-four hours, till the cuticle is raised; then make an
incision into the vesicles, and a quantity of serum will escape. Here,
perhaps, your observation may terminate ; but examine the surface,
and you will find on it a yellow substance, which will exist in a greater
or less degree, according to the length of time the blister has been
applied, on its severity, and on the irritability of the skin ; but, generally
speaking, under the application of a blister, adhesive matter is thrown
out as under adhesive inflammation.

For those who are anxious to know the time required before the adhe-
sive inflammation commences, it may be proper to state, that it is dif-
ferent, according to the structure of the part and nature of the constitu-
tion. In the cavity of the abdomen, the intestines will be glued to-
gether in nineteen hours after the adhesive inflammation has begun.

O

Now I mention nineteen hours particularly, because I have seen it
produced after that time in cases of gun-shot wounds. It may be in
the recollection of some of you, that a Mr. Blight was shot by a man
called Patch, in the neighbourhood of Deptford : the ball traversed the
abdomen. I was called to this case, and Mr. Blight died in nineteen
hours after he had received the injury. Here I had an opportunity of
seeing what I have just mentioned ; the intestines were glued to each



ADHESIVE INFLAMMATION.



41



other, and to the peritoneum ; the peritoneal surface had quantities of
adhesive matter on it, and was firmly united to the surrounding intes-
tines. On the surfaces of wounds the process of adhesion takes place
rapidly ; for if a piece of lint be applied to a newly-made wound, in
twelve hours it will be glued to its surface ; in a dog the adhesive pro-
cess commences in six hours.

Adhesive matter, when effused on a thin membrane, coagulates into
a net-work, assuming the character of cellular membrane.

When adhesive matter has been formed, the blood-vessels soon enter
it, and within a short time it becomes organized ; the vasa vasorum are
elongated by the force of the circulation ; they enter the newly-formed
substance, and send throughout it minute ramifications. On cutting
into adhesive matter within twenty-four hours after it has been deposited,
small bloody spots may be seen, which mark the future situation of the
vessels which nourish it; but it is not till ten days after it has been
formed that adhesive matter becomes completely organized ; for you
will find that a fine injection would not enter adhesive matter sooner
than the tenth or eleventh day after its formation. When vessels elon-
gate, they have not the character of arteries ; in general they take a
serpentine or tortuous course.

Some thought, at one time, and I believe Mr. Hunter was one of this
opinion, that the vessels originated in the newly -formed substance ; but
they arc formed by the elongation of the vasa vasorum of the surround-
ing arteries, which become dilated, lengthened, and serpentine : and the
degree of vascularity will be in proportion to that of the part subjected
to the adhesive inflammation. In tendons, for instance, it will be much
less than in muscles.

This process is of the greatest possible consequence in surgery. It
ought, therefore, to command much of your attention ; and it will be
unfortunate for you if you do not understand it. Without this process
no operation could be attended with success ; its absence, even after
bleeding, would destroy life. Bear this principle in mind, then, gen-
tlemen — always endeavour to effect union by adhesion.

Suppose you were called to a compound fracture, what would you
do ? Endeavour, certainly, by bringing the parts together, to make it
a simple one. Within these few days you have had an opportunity of
witnessing the fatal consequences ofhemorrhage in a case of compound
fracture ; if the adhesive process had taken place, hemorrhage would
have been- prevented, constitutional irritation kept off, and recovery, in
all probability, rendered sure. It is the same in formidable operations ;
the Caesarean operation, which consists in making an incision in the
course of the linea alba, for the purpose of extracting a fectus from the



42



APPEARANCES UNDER



womb, is not dangerous, if the adhesive process take place ; now and
then, from hemorrhage and exhaustion, it proves serious ; but in most
cases, the danger is slight, if union by adhesion be procured. To exem-
plify this by the operation for cataract : in this operation a wound is
made in the eye — more than half of the cornea is cut ; if the adhesive
process take place within twelve hours, the flaps begin to adhere, and in
twenty-four they are consolidated. Suppose, on the contrary, they do
not — violent inflammation supervenes, and the result is destruction to
the eye of the patient ; the success of the operation depends then, in
this instance, on the adhesive process. In a person who had been in
ill health, the inflammation might be too weak, and in another case it
might be too strong ; suppuration would be the consequence ill both in-
stances ; the same effect results in the two cases, though produced by
very different causes. Again, in the operation for strangulated hernia,
an opening is made into the hernial sac, which communicates with the
cavity of the abdomen ; and, if the parts are not afterwards united by
the adhesive process, the patient dies. In the operation for aneurism,
it is adhesive inflammation which saves life ; a ligature is applied to the
artery, a coagulum of blood forms, the adhesive process commences,
fibrin is poured out, and the internal coats of the artery are glued toge-
ther; but for this, when the ligature gave way, hemorrhage would
ensue. In the operation for the radical cure of hydrocele, we have a
beautiful opportunity of witnessing the effects of adhesive inflammation.
After the water has been evacuated, a stimulating injection being
thrown into the cavity excites upon its sides an irritation ; inflamma-
tion is set up, adhesive matter thrown out, the internal surface of the
cavity generally becomes permanently united, and thus a radical cure is
effected.

The treatment of a stump after amputation will best illustrate this
subject. In amputating a limb, your object is first to preserve sufficient
integuments, and not muscles, for if muscular fibres are preserved
with the integuments, they will contract, and retraction of the skin
covering the stump will be the result. When the limb has been
removed, you will apply ligatures to the bleeding vessels : now- I would
not advise you to tie every small vessel ; ligatures on the principal ves-
sels are quite sufficient, and the fewer applied the better, for though it
is desirable to prevent disturbance of the limb afterwards, yet, by wait-
ing a short time after the operation, the smaller arteries will generally
stop.

The ligatures themselves should be small, and consist of fine silk, for
nothing is so bad in operations as the application of coarse ligatures,
excepting perhaps in cases where ossification of the arteries has taken



ADHESIVE INFLAMMATION.



43



place, when it would be justifiable ; with this exception only, it is the
worst possible surgery to apply thick ligatures to arteries ; and if a sur-
geon were to do it, he would understand nothing of his profession ; the
thinner the ligatures are, then, the better.

Now there are two reasons why thin ligatures are preferable — 1st,
because they are less liable to escape ; 2d, they divide the internal coats
of the arteries more effectually : when you use a very fine ligature, the
internal coats will be completely divided, and the external will remain
entire. My friend, Dr. Jones, has published an excellent work on the
natural means by which arteries unite in cases where ligatures are
applied ; and first he states the fact of the internal coats of the artery
being divided by the application of fine ligatures. Thick ligatures also
prevent the wounds from healing so rapidly as thin ones. After the
vessels have been secured, the sponge should be applied, and all coagula
of blood removed, as this is very essential to the union of the part ;
blood is not the means but the prevention of union in such cases, for
unless it be taken away, the adhesive inflammation will not go on.
There is one instance in which blood favours the process of adhesion,
and that is in the application of a ligature on an artery ; with this
exception only, the opinion of blood favouring the process of adhesion is
to be banished from your minds, for there are but two modes by which
union can be effected, viz. by adhesion, and by granulation ; therefore
remove all clots of blood, which will only act as extraneous bodies and
keep up irritation. You are to cut off one end of the ligature close to
the vessel, and let the other hang out of the wound : it has been re-
commended to cut off both ends of the ligature close to the vessels ;
this plan, has, however, been already given up.

This was determined by Mr. Hunter, in the first operation he per-
formed for aneurism on the trunk of the artery above the tumour, in-
stead of on the aneurism itself ; for in that instance he cut the ligature
close to the knot, and copious suppuration afterwards took place. Liga-
tures can only be removed from the vessels by suppuration or absorption
(in the latter case they must be first dissolved and then removed by the
absorbents) ; and conceiving that if a ligature, composed of a substance
easily soluble, were applied to a vessel, and cut close to the knot, it
might be dissolved, and then absorbed, I applied a catgut one to the
femoral artery of an old man, whom I operated on for popliteal aneu-
rism, and cut it close to the vessel ; this case turned out well, for adhe-
sion followed and suppuration did not ensue. Although successful
here, I have tried it in several cases since, and have failed in all, sup-
puration always coming on afterwards. I applied a silk ligature to the
carotid of a dog on one side, and a catgut one to the carotid on the op-



44



APPEARANCES UNDER



posite side : upon killing the dog some days afterwards, I found the
second ligature (catgut) buried in a cyst, and that the first advanced by
the process to the side of the larynx. Experiment and observation show,
then, that it is better to cut one end of the ligature off, and to leave the
other hanging from the mouth of the wound, to be removed when the
ulcerative process is completed, which is from ten to fourteen days. Dr.
Veitch, I believe, first advised the removal of half the ligature.

After amputation, having disposed your ligatures in a line with each
other, and leaving them to hang out at the most depending part of the
wound, you will, if the limb be removed above the elbow or knee,
apply a bandage, to prevent retraction of the muscles and extensive sup-
puration. I have seldom succeeded with my stumps above the knee
when I have not used a roller ; it is better to apply a roller in such cases,
for the muscles will then be glued together, and form one consolidated
mass. Having applied a roller, and brought the integuments together,
I merely put three strips of adhesive plaster over the wound, and one
round the .stump, to keep the ends of the plaster in their place. It is
curious to see the difference between the mode of dressing stumps now,
and that adopted a few years ago ; the old practice was, after the adhe-
sive plaster had been applied, to put some lint, then plaster again, after
that tow, and, lastly, over the whole, a cap of flannel. If a surgeon
were to do this now, he would be laughed out of the operating theatre,
and very deservedly too, because he would prevent the success of the
adhesive process by unduly heating the limb. All that is necessary to
do, is to apply three strips of adhesive plaster over the wound, and one
circular piece; if the weather be hot, to apply the spirit of wine and
water lotion, and if it be cool to keep the limb quiet. The object is to
keep down the inflammation to the adhesive stage ; if it goes beyond
this, suppuration will be the result.

The last circumstance necessary to mention, is the impropriety of
dressing the stump too early ; a person anxious to see whether a union
has taken place, removes the plasters in two or three days : he who does
this overlooks the object in view, and must be shocked, when he looks
at the stump, to see, that by the early removal of the plasters, he has
destroyed all that nature had done. All you ought to do is, in four
days after the operation, to remove one strip of plaster, for the purpose
of letting out any matter which might have collected. In six or eight
days after the operation, it will be proper to dress the stump ; but to
do it before would be absurd.

The treatment which is applicable to stumps, is proper also for com-
mon wounds.

The adhesive process is useful in the formation of cysts. Balls



ADHESIVE INFLAMMATION.



45



encysted have been known to remain in the body for many years.
Morgagni, if I recollect aright, mentions a case where a ball lodged in
a cyst in the lungs for a considerable space of time. If the ball be not
encysted, it travels, and absorption of the parts through which it passes
takes place. A few days ago, a gentleman called on me, who had formerly
received a wound above the zygomatic arch from a ball ; he now had a
swelling on the side of his face. I asked him whether he thought it con-
tained the ball ; to which he replied, no : upon cutting on it, however,
I found it was the ball by which he had been wounded some years
before. It had travelled beneath the zygoma to the middle of the
cheek, on the surface of the parotid gland, from whence I removed it.
Perhaps it was assisted in its course by the action of the temporal mus-
cle. I saw a boy, who had been attending a target at which some
volunteers had been firing ; he thought himself safe at a distance of
thirteen yards ; he was mistaken, however, for one of them shot him in
the collar-bone. Some months after, he came to Guy’s LJospital, and I re-
moved the ball from about the middle of the upper arm. Thus the ball,
by its weight and pressure, had occasioned suppuration and ulceration,
which had enabled it to travel to the situation from whence I extracted it.

Another very important use of adhesive inflammation is that of its
dividing cavities into distinct parts, by which means it fixes a boundary
to the suppurative process ; thus it will divide the cavity of the abdomen
into two, by throwing out adhesive matter on the surface of the colon,
by which it becomes glued to the peritoneum. In abscesses, a cyst is
formed by the adhesive process round the matter, which prevents its
escape into the surrounding cellular tissue.

The advantage of adhesive inflammation is admirably shown in
wounds of the joints. Immediately on the knee joint being opened, the
synovia escapes, the person feels faint, looks pale, and the constitution
appears to have received a severe shock. The wound endangers the
loss of the limb and the patient’s life, if bad treatment be adopted. If
a poultice be applied to such a wound, or fomentations used, a suppu-
rative inflammation will take place on the synovial surfaces ; the carti-
lages become absorbed, and the bones ulcerated ; a profuse discharge
ensues, the constitution becomes extremely irritated ; chills, succeeded
by burning heat and profuse perspiration, frequently follow each other,
and a person, just before in good health, is precipitated into a state of
extreme debility. Sometimes the joint, after weeks, or even months
have elapsed, gradually heals by granulation, with its motion either
entirely gone or greatly impeded.

If, on the contrary, the practitioner brings the edges of the wound
immediately together, and attempts union by the first intention, the



1



ON SUPPURATION.

patient generally escapes from local or constitutional irritation. The
edges of the wound should be brought together by a fine suture— a plan,
to which some surgeons object ; but when the wound is direct into the
joint, it affords an additional security to the patient, as the escape of the
synovia has a constant tendency to prevent adhesion, and to separate the
plaster. The suture should penetrate the skin, the ligament being
carefully avoided. A piece of lint wetted in the patient’s blood is to be
put over the wound, and over this strips of adhesive plaster. Linen
cloths are to be laid over these, and be kept constantly wet with the
liq. plumb, acet., and spirit vini ; a splint is to be placed behind the
joint, to secure perfect rest.

In the operation for hare-lip, it is by the adhesive inflammation the
wound becomes united, and the deformity removed.

The effusion of adhesive matter, by unloading ihe vessels of the part,
has the effect of reducing the inflammation, so that the process generally
terminates as soon as this effect is produced.

LECTURE VIII.

ON SUPPURATION.

Suppuration is the formation of purulent matter from the secreting
orifices of the blood-vessels, which matter is named pus.

It is formed in cavities produced in the body by a process of absorp-
tion, as in abscesses ; it is found also as a secreted fluid on the surfaces
of membranes, or upon granulating surfaces.

The formation of matter is often attended with severe constitutional
irritation ; there are rigors succeeded by heat. When, therefore, you
see a person who has had severe inflammation, and you wish to know if
suppuration has taken place, you ask him if he has had a cold shiver-
ing ; for this is generally the forerunner of the purulent secretion. If
the inflammation be extensive, or seated in any vital organ, the consti-
tutional disturbance will be very severe, and followed by a powerful re-
action. Whilst the rigor continues, the blood collects about the larger
vessels in the neighbourhood of the heart, and in the heart itself ; at
length this organ becomes stimulated to action, and sends the blood
with considerable force to all parts of the body, but more particularly to
that part where pus is about to be secreted. A rigor, therefore, is
merely a constitutional effort towards accomplishing the object that
nature has in view. When pus is easily produced, as upon mucous
surfaces, there is no rigor whatever.

When there is an attempt to produce matter, there is an unusual sen-



ON SUPPURATION.



47



sation of uneasiness in the part, together with a blush on the skin, easily
recognised, by those acquainted with the subject, as a sure indication
that pus either has, or is about to be formed. In the adhesive inflam-
mation, the pain is an acute thrilling one; but here it is more dull, and
is likewise pulsatory or throbbing. As this continues, the tumour be-
comes soft in the middle, but remains hard at the sides ; the centre of
the swelling points, as it is termed; and, upon pressing the part at this
period, fluctuation will be evident.

The next thing to be observed, is an effusion of serum beneath the
cuticle, which separates it from the cutis ; it becomes gradually dis-
tended, and then bursts, leaving the cutis exposed. Ulceration some-
times takes place on the surface of the skin, whilst the same process is
going on internally, so as to facilitate the discharge of the matter ;
generally speaking, however, the ulcerative process is continued entirely
from within. These are the common appearances produced by the
process of suppurative inflammation. Pus is generally formed in from
seven to fourteen days ; but the time required for this process will very
much depend on the constitution of the patient, and the structure of the
part in which the inflammation is seated.

Some parts more readily run into the adhesive, others into the suppu-
rative inflammation ; the pleura, pericardium, peritoneum, &c., are
subject to the former ; while the urethra, vagina, lachrymal duct,
trachea, bronchia, nasal passages, &c., are liable to the latter : serous
surfaces, therefore, are affected by the adhesive inflammation, and
mucous surfaces by the suppurative. The reason why the inflammation
affecting the two structures produces different results appears to be this :
the vessels of serous surfaces are too small to permit the transmission of
the particles which pus contains : but when the inflammation becomes
violent or long continued, then the vessels dilate, and purulent matter is
formed, even on serous surfaces. Some experiments have been made,
which tend to prove that this theory is correct ; for it has been found
that injections which are sufficiently fine to pass freely into the vessels of
mucous surfaces, will not penetrate in the slightest degree into the vessels
of serous surfaces. I shall presently explain this to you more particularly.

In one of the preceding lectures, it was mentioned, that dangerous
consequences sometimes arose from passing bougies in very irritable
habits ; the danger in these cases depends upon the formation of the adhe-
sive inflammation, instead of the suppurative. The duct or canal lead-
ing from the inner angle of the eye, and which conveys the tears into the
nose, is mucous, and, therefore, when inflamed, usually suppurates ;
consequently is only obstructed for a short period ; and even this ob-
struction can be relieved at intervals, by pressing the finger upon the



48



ON SUPPURATION.



skin immediately under the eye, by the side of the nose, by which means
the collected matter will be forced out at the puncta situated in the
under eye-lid. Should the inflammation, however, be of the adhesive
kind, then an obstruction will be formed that can only be relieved by an
operation. This complaint is named fistula lachrytnalis. The tears
now pass over the cheek, and not into the nose, because adhesive matter
has glued the sides of the tube together. The operation for the cure of
this is simple, and will be explained to you hereafter.

The membrane covering the internal surface of the trachea is mucous,
and, therefore, when inflamed, usually suppurates ; but in croup large
quantities of adhesive matter are thrown out, so as very frequently to
occasion death. The coagulable matter adheres so firmly, that it cannot
be disengaged by the ordinary efforts of expectoration ; at last, from its
increase, it fills the trachea, and suffocation is of course the result. Nature
has, as we before remarked, wisely ordained, that the various outlets of the
body should commonly be liable to the suppurative inflammation ; and
if this were not the case, life would be very much shortened indeed.

Arteries and veins, when inflamed, generally pass into the adhesive
inflammation. It occasionally happens, however, that their inner coats
suppurate : and I have more than once known persons die from the
irritation thus excited.

Case . — A man in Guy’s Hospital had a leg removed. In a day or
two he became delirious, and shortly after died. When examined, no
particular disease in his body was found ; but the suppurative process
had been set up in the arteries, and this case caused the fatal catastrophe.
Similar events would follow the operations for aneurism, if the adhesive
inflammation did not supervene instead of the suppurative; for matter
would form above the ligature, and, mixing with the blood, would de-
stroy life. Suppurative inflammation of the veins has often been known
to come on after bleeding, and occasion death. Upon dissection, in
these cases, matter has been found in the heart, mixed with the blood.

Wounds made into joints are always dangerous ; this has been said
to arise from the admission of air. No name can be given to such a
declaration but ignorant nonsense ; for air has no power whatever of
producing inflammation in these cavities, and he who says otherwise
knows nothing about it ; the synovial membrane lining joints is a
mucous membrane, and, therefore, quickly passes into the suppurative
inflammation, which circumstance renders an injury done to these parts
exceedingly difficult to cure; besides, the internal surfaces of joints arc
much more extensive than you would imagine : you would be asto-
nished, if you saw the internal surface of the knee-joint spread out on
this table. Joints are also composed of materials having in themselves



ON SUPPURATION.



49



very little restorative power, being formed of ligament, cartilage, and
bone, parts that soon inflame, suppurate, and become absorbed. When-
ever, therefore, you are called to accidents of joints, and where openings
have been made into them, these you should endeavour to close as
speedily as possible. Likewise, when you have to remove from these
cavities extraneous bodies, you should draw the skin forcibly on one
side, and then cut through it down upon the substance. If the opera-
tion be performed in this manner, the skin being left to itself will return
to its natural situation ; consequently the cut in the integuments and
that in the capsular ligament will not be opposite each other, and union
by the first intention will be much more likely to ensue.

In the treatment of wounds of the theca as much caution is necessary
as in those of the joints — their structure, in fact, nearly resembles the
capsular ligament and synovial membrane : an injury here causes, in a
very short time, great pain and inflammation, and much constitutional
irritation and fever. If matter form, it becomes deposited, or locked
up, as it were, in a tendinous bag ; and so great is the irritation which
it sometimes occasions, that it has been known to destroy life in sixty
hours.

Case — A young gentleman from the West Indies, of great profes-
sional merit, of the name of Alcock, informed me one Monday night,
after a surgical lecture, that he had, in the course of that day, punctured
the theca in some part of his hand — as he was living at the time in the
house of the late Dr. Haighton, I advised him to show it to the Doctor
(who was an exceedingly clever man) ; he did so ; — on the following
day he suffered greatly from constitutional irritation, and on the Wed-
nesday morning died : his system was certainly a very irritable one,
and that accounts, in a great measure, for so speedy a dissolution. When,
therefore, you suspect matter to have formed in these parts, let the
quantity be ever so small, you ought to discharge it. It is surrounded
by a structure, through which, without assistance, it cannot pass; there-
fore nature requires your assistance. At the commencement of inflam-
mation in these injuries, your treatment should be prompt — apply
leeches and lotions, and give your patient calomel and opium — these
measures, judiciously used, will often check the progress of the disease,
and in a short time completely remove it.

formerly it was the opinion that matter was produced by a dissolu-
tion of the solids; but this opinion is now exploded, for we have nume-
rous facts to prove that it is not true ; in the urethra, for example, you
all know that matter will be formed on its surface for months ; and is
the urethra destroyed by it? No, but on the contrary, is thicker than
it was before the discharge existed; and, upon examination of this part

F



50



ON SUPPURATION.



after death, no ulcers have been discovered, even if the matter had been
flowing for months : the ancients thought that gonorrhoea arose from
ulceration of the urethra ; this opinion, therefore, is also found to be
wrong. Again, in large cavities, such as the chest and abdomen, an
immense quantity of matter may be secreted, and yet, after death, no
erosion of the solids will be discoverable ; but the membranes lining
their cavities, namely, the pleura and peritoneum, will be found very
materially thickened. I remember, when there was a very warm dis-
cussion on this subject, the disputants used to put pieces of raw meat
upon the surfaces of ulcers, and after suffering them to remain for some
time, would then carefully weigh them for the purpose of ascertaining
the quantity of substance lost.

Pus is not a fluid produced by the dissolution of the solids ; it is
secreted from the blood-vessels, but not until they have been acted upon
by inflammation. The effects produced by the application of a blister
exemplify this ; when the cuticle is raised, first serum and fibrin arei
thrown out ; remove the cuticle and apply upon the raw skin a piece of
glass ; at first no matter is to be seen, but in a few minutes you will
observe it collect and adhere to the under side of the glass ; bile, urine,
and, in fact, all the fluids, are secreted from the blood, but in each in-
stance the action of the vessels is different.

Pus is composed of serum, and particles swimming in that serum ;
there may be also, a little coagulable matter in the serum : this, how.
ever, is hypothesis ; that fibrin is poured out from the vessels in adhe-
sive inflammation is not hypothesis, but, on the contrary, a well-ascer-
tained fact. The globules of pus are the same as the globules of the
blood, but the action of the vessels appears to take away their colour ;
their form is the same ; size the same : these globules also resemble
those that are contained in mucus.

Pus, when healthy, is a bland fluid, and will not irritate the parts
that produce it. If poured into water, it sinks, because its specific
gravity is greater than that of water. It appears to be composed of the
constituent parts of the blood, slightly changed in their character by
inflammation. Healthy pus, I say, does not irritate parts ; but sur-
geons formerly thought otherwise, and therefore used to cover the sur-
faces of wounds with sponge, for the purpose of sucking up the matter
as fast as it was generated. When, however, pus is unhealthy, having
mixed with it too large a portion of serum, or when bloody, then in
passing over the skin it will irritate and occasion excoriation.

This matter does not appear prone to putrefaction in the healthy con-
stitution, but in some persons it will, in a very short time, become in-
conceivably putrid and fetid.



ON SUPPURATION.



51



Case . — A butcher, when getting out of a hay-loft, missed his footing,
and in trying to save himself from a fall, had the misfortune to hitch
his hand upon a hook, upon which the poor fellow hung like one of his
own sheep. Eight days after the accident, he was brought to Guy’s
Hospital ; tlie next day his hand was opened, and the matter discharged
was most horribly offensive; on the following day he died. Whenever
the matter of an abscess becomes offensive, you should regard it as a bad
symptom ; — such cases are troublesome, and often terminate fatally.

When matter of a poisonous kind, the result of a specific inflamma-
tion, is applied to the surface of the body, it irritates, occasions inflam-
mation and suppuration, and this newly -formed matter is of exactly the
same description as that which produced it ; at least the poisonous
quality is retained undiminished in virulence. This is illustrated by
the discharge of gonorrhcea, chancre, small-pox, &c. To enumerate all
the instances would fatigue you.

But these instances must be considered as additional arguments in
favour of pus being a secretion.

Suppuration is not without its advantages : in two points of view it
is very important.

1st. By forming a covering to granulating surfaces, thereby prevent-
ing the granulations from becoming dry through the influence of the
air; for, if they were not kept moist they could not push forward. 2dly.
The suppurative process is the means resorted to. by nature for
effecting the escape of extraneous bodies : thus a ball, by its pressure,
gives rise to suppuration, and ultimately is discharged, excepting in such
cases as we have before described, where it remains encased by adhesive
matter.

Some wounds are very troublesome, and, do what we will, we cannot
get them to heal. Now and then it happens, if you discontinue your
dressings to such sores, and let their surfaces remain exposed to the
air, incrustations or scabs will form ; under these pus will be secreted,
which, by keeping the granulations constantly moist, will often cause
ulcers of this description to heal, when all artificial attempts have been
completely unsuccessful.

When the constitution has been long accustomed to a discharge from
an ulcer, some caution is requisite when healing it ; for, if done too
suddenly, hectic or apoplectic symptoms are very apt to supervene.
Ancient surgeons observed these ; to obviate which they were in the
habit of making issues in other parts of the body at the time of healing
old sores. Quantities of matter, constantly discharging for a consider-
able period, inevitably act on the constitution as sources of depletion;
and which, if suddenly discontinued, we may reasonably imagine would



52



ON ULCERATION.



produce the symptoms before stated. There is no necessity, however, for
issues to prevent them, as purgative medicines will answer much better,
and speedily carry from the system, by a natural channel, any increase
of its fluids. Mr. Wilson, formerly a lecturer on anatomy in this town,
in his younger days was for a long while annoyed by a spitting of blood,
which threatened him with an attack of pulmonary consumption ; at
length an ulcer formed upon his arm, and shortly after the bleeding
from the lungs ceased. The sore was an exceedingly obstinate one, and
resisted for a great length of time all attempts that were made to close
it ; at last, however, it was accomplished, upon which the bleeding
from the lungs once more returned.

A long continued discharge from a blister has, upon being too sud-
denly checked, produced oppression of the brain.

Suppuration is best promoted by the application of heat and moisture.



LECTURE IX.

, ON ULCERATION.

Ulceration is the absorption of any constituent part of the body. I
have already endeavoured to explain to you, that under the increased
action of the vessels which accompanies inflammation, an increased de-
posit takes place from the arteries ; also, that this deposit is according
to the stage of the inflammation, and the part which the inflammation
attacks ; that the inflammation is either adhesive or suppurative, and
that it ends in the one state in the immediate production of the process
of adhesion, and in the other in the effusion of a quantity of purulent
matter from the extremities of the vessels.

But inflammation has not only an influence on the arteries ; it has
also an effect on the absorbent vessels, which are thrown into a state
of inordinate action whenever any considerable quantity of blood is
thrown upon them. There is a natural balance between the action of
the arteries and the absorbent vessels. In a state of health, and at the
adult period of life, the portion of matter deposited by the arteries, and
the portion taken into the system by the absorbent vessels, are, as nearly
as possible, balanced. In youth a greater quantity is poured out by
the arteries than the absorbents remove ; but in age a smaller quantity
is deposited than absorption is taking away. You find, therefore, that
the balance is destroyed in a different manner at different periods of life;
but when a considerable and inordinate absorption takes place of some
part of the body, that absorption is denominated ulceration.

It was formerly thought that it was necessary to the ulcerative process,



ON ULCERATION.



53



that matter should be formed ; but this is not the case, as ulceration
often occurs without being accompanied by any purulent secretion. The
formation of matter, therefore, is not necessary to the process of ulcera-
tion. The great cause of ulceration is inflammation united with pres-
sure. If the inflammation be considerable, and the pressure but slight,
ulceration will be produced ; and if the pressure be very con-
siderable and the inflammation but slight, still there will be ulce-
ration. As a proof, both that pressure is the cause of ulcera-
tion, and that ulceration is not necessarily accompanied with the
formation of matter, 1 will give you the example of aneurism. Here
is a specimen on the table of a large aneurism of the aorta, just above
the heart, into which you may pass your hand in the hole produced by
the ulceration of part of the ribs and sternum ; those parts having been
absorbed by the pressure of the aneurismal sac, producing an increased
action of the absorbent vessels. Here the pressure is exceedingly great ;
but the degree of inflammation is very slight. In the same manner we
see an aneurism of the aorta on the fore part of the spine, producing
absorption of the vertebrae, by the pressure of the aneurismal bag,
though no matter is effused, the ulceration being produced by the pres-
sure arising from slight inflammation, unaccompanied by any secretion
of matter. From these facts, we are led to conclude that the formation
of matter is not necessary to the ulcerative process ; and that it only
happens on exposed surfaces of the body, where it is necessary for the
protection of sores, by covering the granulations.

The constitutional symptoms of ulceration are slight. In general, a
degree of fever attends it, but it is very slight. The pulse is under 100,
and at the same time small ; we do not find any considerable excitement
of the constitution, and the fever is rather of the hectic or chronic kind,
than sudden or violent in its attack. It continues sometimes for several
days. The pain attending ulceration is not very considerable ; if you
ask the patient, he will tell you that it is of a gnawing kind, as if there
were insects about the part. W e may conclude, therefore, that the irri-
tation attending ulceration is but slight , and the pain not considerable.
With respect to the appearance of the ulcerated part, it looks as if it
were worm-eaten ; the surface is rough, and very irregular.

Sometimes a very considerable portion of the body is removed by
ulceration. Here is an example of an ulcerated tibia on the table. See
to what an extent ulceration has removed not only the cancellated struc-
ture of the bone, but the shell in which that structure is contained.
Here is another example in which a great part of the tibia has
been removed; the ulceration has extended six or seven inches, so



54



ON ULCERATION.



that little more than the fibula of the leg remains : such is the power
of the absorbent vessels, of feeding, as it were, upon themselves.

The ulcerative process is sometimes extremely rapid in its progress :
as much will be destroyed in the course of a few hours as will require
weeks and months to repair. In proportion to the extent of surface
destroyed will be the difficulty with which that surface is closed. Some-
thing will depend, also, on the form of the ulceration, and the kind of
surface exposed : but the general rule is, that the difficulty of the repa-
rative process is proportional to the extent of the surface destroyed .

It is a curious law, with respiect to the ulcerative process, that it has a
tendency to the nearest external surface of the body. This is a law which
i6 attended with the most salutary effects ; for, if it were otherwise, the
body would very frequently be destroyed by the ulcerative process. In
consequence of this tendency, matter formed at a depth in the body finds
its way through the integuments, instead of proceeding through the
more important parts. Many examples may be given of this law. One
of the most remarkable is this : — Matter forms not unfrequently behind
the sternum, close to the pleura and pericardium, which membranes are
extremely thin — not so thick as paper. From the proximity of these
membranes, it might be expected that the matter would generally open
into the pleura, and, by discharging itself into the cavity of the chest,
destroy life. Instead of this, however, the pleura undergoes no other
alteration than that of becoming thick ; and while it is acquiring this
addition of substance, the process of absorption is going on in the inner
part of the sternum, an aperture is formed through it, and the matter
makes its way through the bone and integuments, rather than through
the pleura and pericardium. The same circumstance takes place with
respect to the peritoneum. If matter be formed in the abdominal mus-
cles, the peritoneum is very rarely absorbed to admit the matter into the
cavity of the abdomen : but the matter makes its way through the inte-
guments, and finds an outlet on the surface of the body.

So in an abscess of the liver, the matter is discharged, not through the
skin, which is a more remote surface, but into the cavity of the intes-
tines, whence it is carried off by stool, or discharged into the stomach,
from which it is thrown up by vomiting. These effects are produced in
the following manner : the surface of the abscess becoming united with
a portion of intestine or stomach by the adhesive process, the ulcerative
action commences, by which a communication is formed between these
surfaces, and the matter is discharged in the manner before mentioned,
without danger, or at least with little danger, to life.

The same thing takes place in absorption of the bones. Thus, in



ON ULCERATION.



55



ulceration of the tibia, the matter breaks through the skin, or that sur-
face which is only covered by skin and periosteum. This is a law in
part depending on the less vitality and greater irritability of those parts
which are nearest the surface of the body. The external parts of the
body are the most weakly with respect to circulation, and most readily
absorbed. I do not mean to say that they are weakly with respect to
quantity of blood, for they possess a considerable share of vascularity ;
hut they are weakly with respect to the living powers. The external
parts of the body are more irritable, and more subject to vicissitudes
of action from corresponding changes of temperature than other parts of
the body. They have less strength of circulation, and consequently,
give way to ulceration more readily than those parts which are more
deeply seated, and possess a greater strength of circulation. Another
reason is, that the adhesive process goes on gluing the more internal
parts, while the external, which are thin and weak, become united to
these parts, and in this way form a considerable solid. An instance of
this is found in the adhesion of the pleura to a lung, so as to form one
structure. It maybe considered, then, as a law of the animal economy,
that the ulcerative process has a disposition towards the nearest external
surface of the body.

Those parts of the body which are newly formed are more liable to be
absorbed than those which have long existed. A part covered by a
cicatrix proceeds rapidly to ulceration, because it is more weakly consti-
tuted than those parts which have existed longer. The irritability of a
part is proportional to its weakness ; and the parts which are weak and
irritable fall most readily into the ulcerative process. To take a familiar
illustration — when a child labours under symptoms of constitutional de-
rangement in cutting a tooth, why do you lance its gums? You cut the
gums, not for the purpose of making an immediate passage for the tooth,
and procuring immediate relief to the child, but because, when the gum
by the adhesive process heals upon the divided part, a cicatrix is pro-
duced by this little operation, which is very readily absorbed ; and the
result is, that when the tooth rises, the child cuts it with much less pain
and irritation than it would otherwise have done. If a man have in-
flammation in his leg, and this falls near a place where ulceration pre-
viously existed, the scar produced by the old ulcer gives way much
more readily than the original skin. I have observed that if a patient
under gonorrhoea has had an abscess in the urethra, which will now and
then happen in consequence of suppuration of the lacunae, or if from the
same cause he has had an abscess in the scrotum, or on the side of the
penis, it he should get a second gonorrhoea, he will be sure to be attacked
with a similar abscess. Proceed with as much care as you may — guard



56



ON ULCERATION.



against inflammation with all possible caution — and yet, if lie has
abscess in the first gonorrhoea, it will infallibly return in the same part,
if he get a second.

One of the most remarkable instances of the readiness with which the
process of absorption attacks newly-formed parts, may be seen in Lord
Anson's Voyage Round the World — a work which, I doubt not, is
generally known to you. It is a most able and entertaining publica-
tion ; and if any student has not read it, I can strongly recommend it
to his perusal : for, while professional knowledge should undoubtedly
be the first object of your pursuit, general literature should not be ne-
glected, and is so far from being imcompatible with that primary object,
that it cannot fail to enlarge your views, and give efficacy to your pro-
fessional researches. So intimate is the connexion between every object
of useful and scientific inquiry, that there is hardly one branch of
knowledge which does not in some measure throw light and illustration
upon another. The circumstance which I am about to mention may
illustrate this remark. Lord Anson’s book is one of the most valuable
works which has appeared on nautical subjects ; nor is it without its
use as illustrative of a principle on surgery. Lord Anson’s expedition
to the Pacific Ocean was undertaken with a view of destroying the
power of Spain in the New World, as he was obliged to sail sooner
than he expected, many of the crew which he took out were invalids,
some having cicatrices, and others having previously had fractured
bones. In his passage round Cape Horn, he encountered very severe
weather; many ships were obliged to return; some were lost, and the
crews of those which succeeded in getting at last to the Isle of J uan Fer-
nandez suffered great hardships. In doubling Cape Horn, the crew
suffered severely from attacks of the scurvy ; and it was remarked by the
clergyman, who was an observing man, though he knew nothing of our
profession, that the men who had had ulcers before were invariably
attacked with ulceration in the same parts, and that if their bones had
been formerly fractured they became disunited.

This does not surprise us, because we know that scurvy produces the
ulcerative process, attacking the gums, causing profuse bleeding, Sue . ;
that the ulcerative process has a stronger disposition towards parts
newly formed, and that in this case, therefore, it appeared in parts
where ulcers had formerly healed, and in disunited limbs where callus
had previously formed. When the men got fresh vegetables, &c., on
shore, they recovered their health ; their bones united, and their sores
healed. There cannot be a better example than this for the purpose of
showing the readiness with which newly-formed parts ulcerate, as com-
pared with the original structures of the body.



ON ABSCESSES.



57



The parts more remote from the heart ulcerate more readily than
those in the vicinity of the heart. This circumstance led me to say, that
when the vital action is feeble, and the power of the circulation dimi-
nished, we find a greater disposition to the ulcerative process than other-
wise. Thus for one ulcer in the arm we find twenty in the lower ex-
tremities ; and you cannot but have observed, in going round the wards,
the great number of sore legs, those opprobia of our hospitals.

In those parts which are endued with little vital power, ulceration
takes place very readily ; while in those to which the quantity of blood
sent is very small, ulceration takes place with difficulty. This is the
case with tendons. Tendinous parts possess very little blood ; very few
arteries or absorbent vessels are distributed to them. Hence, the pro-
cess of absorption goes on with great difficulty, and tendons will slough
to a great extent rather than become absorbed. This circumstance must
influence our practice. In abscess under the fascia, an incision should
be made as soon as possible through the covering, to liberate the con-
fined matter. So in abscess of the finger, when the constitution suffers
because the theca will not give way to the process of ulceration, and the
nervous system becomes irritated by the pressure of confined matter, an
early incision should be made to liberate the matter, and give relief to
the constitution. The same practice should be pursued in abscess of
the palm of the hand.

The ulcerative process is useful to the animal economy, in removing
extraneous bodies from the system. Thus a ball lodged in the body,
and a ligature round an artery, are disengaged by the process of ulcera-
tion. It is useful also in the exfoliation of portions of bone, in sepa-
rating parts which would otherwise remain in the body, perhaps for the
remainder of life. In three or four months a considerable portion of
exfoliated bone will be separated by the ulcerative process. You will
find a case of popliteal aneurism in the other hospital, where the leg
has sloughed a little below the calf. Almost the whole of the leg has
separated, except the tibia and fibula. A very small portion still re-
mains to separate. By my advice nothing has been done to the living
solids, and the process of nature is left to take its course. You will
soon see that the bones themselves will separate by the process of exfo-
liation, and thus nature will herself perform the operation of amputa-
tion without loss of blood, or any danger to life.

ON ABSCESSES.

I shall now proceed to the consideration of abscesses.

An abscess is a collection of matter in a cyst, produced by inflamma-
tion. What happens in the formation of abscess is as follows : — First



58



ON ABSCESSES.



there is an inflammation of the adhesive kind in the cellular tissue, by
which the different cells of the cellular membrane become filled with
adhesive matter. A slight ulcerative process takes place, the inflam-
mation still proceeding, and a little cavity is formed by the ulcerative
process, a space being left for the effusion of pus, the rasult of the
second stage of inflammation. A drop of matter is secreted into the
cavity, and as soon as it is poured out, the pressure on the side occasions
an increase of the ulcerative process, which adds to the cavity previously
formed. More matter is then produced, and the surrounding solids
having a tendency to the ulcerative process, it is accumulated, so as to
lead to absorption of the neighbouring parts. In the formation of ab-
scess, the matter does not produce absorption of all the parts around
equally, but it excavates chiefly on the side towards the skin, and very
little in the opposite direction ; a circumstance which led to the reflec-
tion, that matter had no power of eroding, as was formerly supposed,
when it was thought that matter acted chemically on the solids like an
acid, or caustic alkali.

Abscesses are dangerous according to the following circumstances: —

First, from their size. It is not, however, the quantity of matter pro-
duced which renders them dangerous, but the difficulty which nature
has in repairing the devastation made by excavation of the solids, from
the pressure of the matter.

An abscess may discharge a quart of matter, and the constitution may
have been scarcely affected by it ; but very soon after it is opened the
constitution begins to suffer. It is not, therefore, the quantity of mat-
ter, but the process of restoration after the evacuation of the matter,
which affects the constitution. The largest abscesses which occur in
the body are those of the liver. Patients will sometimes recover from
abscesses of this part, in which immense quantities of matter have
formed. I remember one of enormous magnitude, from which the pa-
tient recovered.

Case. — Dr. Saunders, the lecturer on medicine at Guy’s, asked me to
see a woman who had a large abscess on the side. I made an opening
into it with a lancet, and it discharged a surprising quantity of matter,
as much as would fill two-thirds of a wash-hand basin. I have heard,
indeed, of much larger quantities of matter having been discharged.
After pressing out the matter, I passed a roller tightly round the abdo-
men, and brought the parts together, with a view of producing the
adhesive process, which now and then occurs. I did not see the pa-
tient again, but some days after I met Dr. Saunders, who asked me
how I thought the patient was going on. I told him I supposed he
asked me, because he thought me very sanguine; and he replied, that



ON ABSCESSES.



59



I should bo gratified to learn that the woman tfas doing extremely
well. In fact, the orifice had closed ; no more matter was discharged,
and the patient got well without any bad symptoms. I have men-
tioned this case, because it may guide your practice when you are
operating upon large abscesses, and show you the propriety ol en-
deavouring to procure the adhesive process, by bringing the sides of
the abscess together. Very large abscesses sometimes terminate favour-
ably, but in a great number of cases they destroy life.

The next circumstance which renders abscesses dangerous is their
number. Thus, the great number of little abscesses on the surface of
the body, in small-pox, frequently destroy life. Here nature performs
the suppurative process ; the pustules die away, and the cuticle is
separated from the surface of the body ; but nature has not the power,
in many cases, of repairing the destruction of the cutis ; the exposure
of the nerves of the skin occasions great constitutional irritation, and
the patient dies, as if destroyed by a bum or a scald.

Abscesses are also dangerous, from their being situated in vitally
important parts, such as the brain, heart, or lungs ; or when they are
not seated in parts of vital importance, from their pressure on essential
organs.

Cases . — A woman was admitted into this hospital for a complaint
in the throat, occasioned by swollowing a pointed bone. All she
complained of, at first, was a soreness in the throat ; but she was
shortly after seized with difficulty of breathing, which increased greatly,
and she died. On examination after death, I found, upon making an
incision into the pharynx, that between it and the fore part of the
vertebrae, a large abscess had formed, which by pressing the pharynx
forward on the epiglottis and glottis, occasioned difficulty of breathing,
and in the end destruction of life. Shortly after this. Dr. Babington
came to this hospital with a friend of his, who was labouring under
great difficulty of breathing. He requested me to examine his throat :
having put my finger on the back of the pharynx, and felt fluctuation
there, I told him that this was a case of which I had seen an instance,
where the patient had died from a collection of matter formed in the
same situation . I immediately procured a seton needle, and including
it in a canula, like a trocar, I put it down into the pharynx, let out a
considerable quantity of matter, and the patient was relieved. Here
was a case, which, but for this operation, would probably have termi-
nated fatally, by the pressure of the matter on vitally important parts.
In the same manner, abscesses in the perineum, or between the prostate
gland and the rectum, will, by their pressure on the urethra, occasion
irritation of that part, and sometimes complete retention of urine.



60 ACUTE AND CHRONIC ABSCESS.

Thus, we find that abscesses, though situated in parts not of themselves
vitally important, sometimes become dangerous by their pressure on
more important parts.

LECTURE X.

ACUTE AND CHRONIC ABSCESS.

At the conclusion of our last lecture, gentlemen, we stated that the
danger attending the formation of abscesses arose from their size, num-
ber, and pressure on important parts ; and lastly, that when they
formed in important parts themselves, they generally proved destructive
to life.

Another danger which we did not then mention is, when abscesses
occur between bones and the covering of bones. Whenever bones form
the boundary of abscesses, such abscesses are exceedingly tedious, and
in most cases dangerous. Thus it is in psoas abscess : in this disease
the matter begins to collect on the fore part of the vertebra, and proceed-
ing through the hollow of the psoas muscle till it reaches the groin,
where it makes its appearance just below Poupart’s ligament ; and from
examination of these cases after death, the vertebrae are found ulcerated.
It is not my intention this evening to enter into the consideration of
psoas or lumbar abscesses, as they will be treated of on another occa-
sion, but I just mention the complaint to show the danger of abscesses
between bones and their coverings ; and the reason of it is, that the pro-
cess of exfoliation takes place, and they then become very long and
tedious in then- progress.

Abscesses are acute or chronic. The common course an acute ab-
scess takes is three weeks. The adhesive inflammation first begins ;
this is succeeded by the suppurative : and, lastly, the ulcerative pro-
cess comes on ; and it is generally three weeks from its commencement
before matter is discharged. But chronic abscesses are slower in their
march ; take, for instance, the psoas abscess, to which we have alluded ;
it is often six months before matter makes its appearance in that com-
plaint. If a person comes to you with a psoas abscess, and you ask
how long he has had pain in his loins, he will tell you for four, five, or
six months past ; seldom less than four, and generally for the space of
six months. There are varieties in the irritability of different constitu-
tions, but if you see a man with swelling in the groin, which, when he
coughs, rebounds under your hand, and has a fluctuating feel, and who
has had for four or five months pain in his loins, you will say that it is
psoas abscess ; so these are the criteria by which you are to know it.
Chronic abscesses sometimes occur in the female breast.



I



ACUTE AND CHRONIC ABSCESS.



61



Cases . — A lady was sent to me from Sussex some years ago, to have
her breast removed : knowing the surgeon who had recommended this
person to me to be an intelligent man, I did not attentively examine
the breast, but said to the lady, I will call on you soon, and perform
the operation. I fixed the day, and was to perform the operation, the
patient being seated in a chair before me, when I said to the gentleman
(Mr. Edwards) who was assisting me, I think that I feel a sense of
fluctuation here, at least I will not proceed to remove the breast till I
have ascertained whether it be matter. I took a lancet, and made an
opening into it, and out gushed a quantity of matter. Thus a chronic
abscess had existed in this part for a considerable time. Very lately,
while going round Guy’s Hospital, one of the young gentlemen, or I
believe, Mr. Key, brought me a woman who had a chronic tumour of
the breast. On examining it, I perceived a slight fluctuation, and
stated that most probably it contained matter, but was told, in reply to
this observation, that it had existed for four or five months ; I said,
however, it did not signify — asked for a lancet — made a puncture into
it, which let out a quantity of matter ; and went away smiling. I
merely mention to you these cases to put you on your guard : for I have
seen breasts removed, which were only chronic abscesses ; and thus,
from an ignorance of this circumstance, you might put your patient to
a cruel operation, where a small incision would have done.

In the treatment of acute abscesses, the best medicine you can give is
the liquor ammoniac acetatis, sulphate of magnesia, and opium ; six
ounces of the first, one ounce of the second, and a drachm of the tinc-
ture of opium, of which the dose is three or four table spoonfuls three
times a day. By this medicine you lessen irritation, and expe-
dite the suppurative and ulcerative process : no medicine that I have
observed, under such circumstances, gives so much relief. The sulphate
of magnesia prevents any costiveness from the opium, and the opium
tranquillizes the nervous system, and lessens pain. The local treat-
ment consists in the application of fomentations and poultices : and
why, you may ask, use both these remedies ? To promote heat and
moisture, a greater quantity of blood is sent to the part, and a relaxa-
tion of the vessels takes place ; this expedites the suppurative process,
and that being done, the ulcerative process takes place with more ease.
'1 he kind of poultice to be applied to the part is of little importance ;
linseed-meal and water, bread and water, &c. No stimulating appli-
cation would do ; the object is to preserve the heat and moisture of the
part, and to prevent evaporation : let the part be enveloped in oil-silk,
for, by its assistance, the heat of a part is preserved, and evaporation
prevented. It is desirable in the suppurative process to prevent



a



62



ACUTE AND CHRONIC ABSCESS.



evaporation ; oil-silk is what is generally used then in private prac-
tice ; it is clean, agreeable to the patient, and most conducive to his
comfort.

Before proceeding to the consideration of chronic abscesses, I will say
a few words on the opening of abscesses. If an acute abscess seems
disposed to go through its different stages without any interruption, the
best practice is to leave it undisturbed. Acute abscesses, beginning
under aponeurotic fasciae, ought to be opened as early as possible ; the
earlier the better. The moment one drop of matter may be felt to fluc-
tuate, it is advisable to make a free opening, both as it regards the con-
stitution and the part. Whenever the matter can be felt close to bone,
it will be right to open it, excepting in cases where it may occur from
severe courses of mercury, between the cranum and pericranium. Mer-
cury will inflame the periosteum (and the pericranium is a part of the
periosteum) to a greater degree than the venereal disease itself ; and in
those cases where a fluid exists between the pericranium and bone, un-
attended with any blush, do not open it ; it will be removed by purging,
and giving bountifully the decoction of sarsaparilla. But when matter
is formed, and there is a blush, it will not be absorbed ; an opening
must be made, exfoliation will often take place ; but when there is no
blush, beware of opening the tumour.

Now, gentlemen, the treatment of chronic abscesses will be very
different from those of the acute kind. In the last case, you wish to
diminish the state of excitement in the constitution ; and in the former
you do all you can to give it additional powers, by allowing generous
diet, and giving the patient ammonia and bark ; the ammonia is the
medicine on which the principle reliance is to be placed. You know
that of late bark has been much used ; but people are apt to run into
extremes — bark assists the suppurative process ; generous diet must
be allowed, in order to increase the action of the parts, by giving tone
to the constitution. Stimulant poultices should be applied to the part,
and the best I know is the muriate of soda (common salt) and water,
a meat-spoonful of salt to a pint of water, and the poultice should be
wetted with this; yeast and oatmeal, vinegar and flour, each of these
expedite the process of suppuration. In indolent cases, it is customary
to employ stimulant plasters, and the best I know is the empl. galb.
comp. ; it is stimulating, and consequently excites the action of the
part. The emplast. ammon. cum hydrarg., and the emplast. thuris
comp, are also used ; they, however, are more tranquillizing, and, in
general, excites slight perspiration over the part, similar in its opera-
tion to the soap cerate, which is also of use.

These then, gentlemen, are the remedies, local and constitutional, to



ACUTE AND CHRONIC ABSCESS.



63



be used in chronic abscesses : but it remains now to be considered how
to treat chronic abscesses, when it becomes necessary to open them :

I shall now proceed to tell you. Suppose you are called to a case
where there is a collection of matter under the fascia lata of the thigh
(the largest in the body), extending, as it often does, from just above
the knee to the trochanter major ; what would you do i Open it
certainly ; make an incision half an inch in length, and squeeze out all
the matter you can. Having done this, apply a roller, making the
turns all over the thigh, with the exception of the opening ; the result
of this is, in many instances, that adhesive inflammation is excited,
and thus the sides of the cavities are often readily united ; always take
care, in the application of the pressure, to leave the mouth of the
wound uncovered. The same directions are to be attended to in col-
lections of matter, when met with under the tendinous expansion which
covers the muscles of the leg and fore-arm ; the object is to endeavour
to produce the adhesive inflammation, just as in the case of abscess in
the liver, that I stated to you on the last evening, from which the matter
was evacuated by the puncture of a lancet, and afterwards by means of
pressure ; the adhesive inflammation took place, and the recovery of
the patient was the consequence. This, then, is to be your practice, to
endeavour to procure a union of the sides of the cavities by the adhe-
sive process.

Another reason for the early discharge of matter is the prevention of
scars, particularly in exposed parts of the body. This may appear to
you of little consequence, but I tell you it is not so : scars, from ab-
scesses in the neck of females, excite in the minds of most of our sex a
reluctance to associate with them ; and thus many a fine young girl
may, from these blotches and scars, be doomed to perpetual celibacy.
No part of the practice of surgery has been so bad as the manner in
which wounds on the neck have been treated. I have seen on one side
of the neck large scars from old wounds that had been badly managed,
whilst, on the other side, where the treatment had been more skilful,
scarcely any vestige of a wound was to be seen. I have, from very
early in life (and subsequent experience has proved to me its use), been
exceedingly careful in the management of these cases. Aperients, with
calomel and rhubarb, should be given ; evaporating lotions should be
used. You must be strict as to diet and regimen; for though the
patient be debilitated, he must be made still weaker. The best mode to
adopt in these cases is, to open the tumours before the skin is much
affected, and before a blush has appeared, and scars will in general be
prevented. It is desirable, in opening the tumours, to use a very fine
knife, for two reasons: — 1. A small opening is made. 2. It does not



64



ACUTE AND CHRONIC ABSCESS.



alarm the person. The knife I always use is the one contained in the
eye-case, for cutting up the cataract, the blade one-eighth of an inch
wide, and it appears to the patient as a needle. 'When you press the
sides of the wound, take care to squeeze out all the solid flakes of matter
to be met with in scrofulous tumours. If this be not attended to, they
will at last slough ; but if, on the contrary, you carefully avoid leaving
any of that unorganized substance, adhesion will take place, and the
wound heal up. Every thing in these cases depends on getting rid of
the solid matter. Bread poultices, wetted with a sulphate of zinc lotion
and spirits of wine, may be used afterwards.

Case — Whilst living at Broad Street, in the City, a lady came to me
with a tumour in the side of the neck. I perceived on the opposite
side several scars ; I said, “ Will you allow me to try if I can prevent
a scar here ?” She answered, it was for that purpose she had consulted
me. Warm poultices had been used on the previous occasions, with
which I would have nothing to do in this, and she got well with scarcely
a pimple to be seen. It is of the highest importance, then, to endea.
vour to prevent those appearances, which, on the exposed parts of the
body, produce such painful feelings. In the higher orders of life, par-
ticularly, a child with scars and blotches on its neck would be secluded
from society.

Now, gentlemen, there is a point of great importance to be attended
to, viz. — the direction in which you make the opening : always make
it transversely, and not in the axis of the neck; for when the wound
heals, it will scarcely be seen among the creases or folds of the neck.
One more observation on this subject : let me entreat you not to open
these tumours when they have a blush on them like the hue of a grape ;
the veins are in a dilated state, and if you open the tumour, you will
bring discredit on yourself. If the edges of the wound should not
unite in any part, a little injunction of sulphate of zinc or copper may
be used.

There are two other points connected with this subject, which I will
mention to you, and then I shall have done.

1. The causes of hectic fever. You are all aware that a continued
fever, i. e. rigors followed by heat, and a sweating stage, attend the
formation of matter : these rigors take place once or twice in twenty-
four hours, according to the irritability of the part and constitution :
and had it been asked, thirty or forty years ago, on what it depended, it
would have been said, absorption of matter into the constitution. Some
of the old surgeons used to put sponge to the mouth of wounds, to
absorb the matter, and prevent its being carried into the constitution ;
but gentlemen, it appears to have no power on the constitution.



ACUTE AND CHRONIC ABSCESS.



65



There is no doubt, certainly, that the inoculation of putrid matter will,
as we often see, sometimes prove fatal. The proofs that the absorption
of common matter into the constitution does not produce fever, are —

1. It is not during the formation of matter that the fever comes on ; for
never till after the abscesses have broken, is the patient attacked with it.
Certainly, the formation o&'matter will be attended with a slight fever,
but not of the hectic kind : the tongue will be clean, the pulse very
little affected, and the person very slightly deranged ; but after an open-
ing is made into the part, constitutional irritation sometimes goes on,
and life is then endangered.

2. The degree of hectic fever is not at all proportionate to the size
of the surface on which the matter is formed. Look, for instance, at a
large wound on the leg : the person will be going about with it, and
feel little or no inconvenience ; whilst a sore on the lungs of the size of
a crown produces hectic fever of the most violent kind. On one part,
it is very considerable ; on another, it is very slight.

3. Hectic fever comes on when no matter has formed. A woman,
who had her leg amputated, came into the hospital for a pain in the
knee on the same side ; the symptoms of constitutional irritation were
so severe, that in consequence Mr. Chandler held a consultation. The
knee-joint was a little enlarged, and violent pain in the part, with great
constitutional disturbance existed. Amputation was now performed
above the joint, and after the operation I had an opportunity of examin-
ing the limb. There was no formation of matter in the knee; in the
condyles, however, of the thigh-bone the ulcerative process had com-
menced, and the hectic fever was the effect, in this case, not of a dis-
ease of the knee-joint, but of the cancellated structure of the thigh-bone.
In those cases also where matter has been absorbed, no hectic fever can
come on. Some years ago, my old friend, Mr. Cline, thought that psoas
abscesses might be cured by causing the absorption of the matter.
From the case of Dr. Saunders, which occurred at that time, he tried
the effect of digitalis on a boy of sixteen years old, who had a psoas
abscess ; the size of the tumour diminished, the skin became flaccid ;
but as soon as the digitalis was left oft', the matter returned again, and
during the trial of the medicines, the pulse was lessened, and the boy a
little weakened — symptoms which, as you well know, are produced by
digitalis. But during this time, no hectic fever came on ; therefore,
the belief of the absorption of matter being the cause of hectic fever is
unfounded.

The last circumstance that I shall mention, is the influence which
the admission of air into cavities has in producing local irritation.
*'Ow, from what I stated concerning the absorption of matter into the



66



ACUTE AND CHRONIC ABSCESS.



constitution, I think you will have agreed with me : whether you have
or not I do not care ; it is my duty to state to you my opinion — you
must think for yourselves ; only do not rest contented with thinking :
make observations and experiments ; for without them your thinking
will not be of much use. The circumstance, however, about the ad-
mission of air into abscesses, when they are'opened, not producing local
irritation, will be less readily understood. When an opening is made
into an abscess, very little irritation supervenes till the third day ; I say
the third day, because it is not till then that constitutional disturbance
takes place. If asked whether air has any influence in producing local
irritation, you may answer, yes ; but I say that it is not the case. Old
surgeons, in their opinion on this subject, maintained that it was the
admission of air which produced the local irritation attending the open-
ing of abscesses, and endeavoured to cure hydrocele by inflating it after
the evacuation of the water. But what was the consequence ? when the
air became absorbed, the adhesive inflammation did not take place, and
the hydrocele returned.

Again, experiments have been made on animals: air has been blown
into the cellular membrane of a dog ; nothing but a temporary stiffness
from the distention of the skin takes place, and when the air is ab-
sorbed, the crackling goes off without the adhesive inflammation. Dr.
Haighton made an ingenous experiment some years ago : he inflated
the abdomen of a dog from an opening in the tunica vaginalis ; and
this mode of doing it evinced his knowledge ; for in the dog and many
other animals, there is a communication with the abdomen from under
the tunica vaginalis. The dog was let loose; he was stiff for a few
days, but when the air was absorbed he became quite well.

I know a curious circumstance which took place at the dep6t at
Norwich ; it was at the time when persons were drawn to serve in the
army. A man, unwilling to become a soldier, came to the surgeon,
and said that he had a large rupture, which disabled him ; he showed it,
and the surgeon sent him away. This man had made a puncture just
above the pubis, and inflated it with a brass blow pipe ; the man him-
self mentioned it to a surgeon at Yarmouth as a joke. What takes
place when air is admitted into the cavity of the chest ? An air cell
gives way, the wind goes into the cellular tissue, the face and body
becomes bloated up, but is afterwards removed by absorption, without
producing any inflammation ; thus a person who holds that the
admission of air into cavities produces the irritation attending the open-
ing of abscesses takes a narrow and partial view of the case.

[After the lecture, the stomach of a dog which died of hydrophobia
was exhibited to the class. The oesophagus was inflamed, and the



ON GRANULATION.



67



internal surface itself very red ; there were also deposits of coagulated
blood between the mucous and muscular coats, an appearance which, Sir
Astley said, had always been observed in dogs that had died of this
complaint. The animal had unfortunately bitten four persons, who
were under medical treatment.]

LECTURE XI.

ON GRANULATION.

I have endeavoured to describe to you the first mode in which the
union of wounds, and the mode of filling up cavities is effected, namely,
by the process of adhesion. I shall now proceed to consider the other
mode of union between divided parts of the body, namely, Granulation ;
thus the two processes which Nature institutes for the purpose of filling
up the cavities of the body, for the cure of wounds, are adhesion and gra-
nulation. If you are asked for a definition of the term granulation, you
will say that a granulation is a newly-formed part, generally red in colour,
and having the power of secreting pus. The mode in which granula-
tion is produced is as follows : — and you will find it very similar to
adhesion, but different from that process in one respect. When an abscess
has been opened, or when a wound has been produced, if the abscess
be not immediately closed, or if the edges of the wound have not been
brought together, inflammation is excited, and this inflammation occa-
sions an effusion of the fibrin of the blood upon the surface of the wound.
This fibrin is poured out in a layer which covers the surface of the
wound. The layer of fibrin soon becomes vascular, for blood-vessels,
which are elongations of the vasa vasorum of the divided vessels, are
forced by the action of the heart into the fibrin which has been deposited,
and this layer consequently becomes vascular. The difference between
the mode of union by adhesion and by granulation, is, that in the latter
the vessels shoot to the surface of the layer which has been thrown out,
terminating by open mouths on the surface of the newly-formed sub-
stance, and secreting pus, at the same time that a layer of lymph, or
fibrin, as it is more correctly termed, is effused. The fibrin which is
poured out, besides this purulent secretion from the vessels, forms a
second layer, into which the vessels shoot as before. The vessels sup-
porting the first layer are the means of supporting the second layer,
where the vessels terminate, as before, by open mouths on the surface of
the substance effused. In this manner layer after layer is formed until
the cavity becomes filled.

The characters by which granulations are distinguished are these ;



68



ON GRANULATION.



tlieir surfaces are uneven ; they are generally red in colour, and they
secrete matter. I know not whether you have followed me or not, but
this process may be easily explained. Suppose we open an abscess ;
the result is, that adhesive inflammation is produced in the internal sur-
face of the cavity. A layer of adhesive matter is in this way thrown
out, and if the sides of the abscess are brought together by passing a
roller round it, we may often prevent the future formation of matter, as
I have before had occasion to explain to you. But if the union by
adhesion does not take place, then granulations are formed in the follow-
ing manner: — When fibrin is poured out, the vessels shoot up to its
surface, permeate the newly-formed substance, and terminate by open
mouths on the surface of the layer. This layer becomes the means of
filling up a portion of the cavity ; it is soon succeeded by another ; the
vessels become elongated, effuse matter on the surface, and shoot up, as
before, to the second layer of fibrin. In this manner one layer after
another is formed, until the cavity of the wound is entirely filled. The
vessels shooting into granulations are very numerous ; they are princi-
pally arteries. If you inject an ulcer of the leg, the great degree of vas-
cularity in the granulating surfaces is accounted for by the number of
vessels divided into radiated branches, which we see entering the granu-
lations, and producing the arborescent appearance which is observed in
them. In examining the structure of granulations, they appear to be-
come vascular in the following manner : — An artery enters at the base
of the granulation, and is then divided into radiated branches ; from
these vessels pus is secreted, and an incrustation is formed, producing a
layer of adhesive matter on the surface of the granulations. This is a
little difficult to conceive ; it is a circumstance which, I believe, has
never been observed, and which I learned in the following manner : — I
took a portion of injected ulcer from the arm, and threw it into alcohol,
in order to observe its vascularity. After it was thrown into the alcohol
it was so opaque on the surface that no blood-vessels could be seen. It
is the fibrous matter, therefore, covering the surface of the granulations
which receives the blood-vessels. In this view a granulation may be con-
sidered as a gland, and the surface of an ulcer merely as a glandular
surface. Now a gland is a part of the body in which a secretion from
the extremities of the arteries takes place, and the blood which is not
employed in the secretion is returned to the heart by means of the veins
which accompany the arteries. So in granulations, the arteries throw
a quantity of blood near the surface of the wound, and there secrete pus.
There is a vein accompanying each artery, and the fluid conveyed by the
vessels is partly converted into pus on the surface of the ulcer, and
partly returned back to the heart.



ON GRANULATION.



60



Granulations are not good absorbent surfaces in ulcers recently formed ;
but if the ulcers have existed for any length of time, the absorbent ves-
sels readily take into the system any substance which may be applied to
them. In this way we frequently see persons salivated by the use of
injections of the oxymuriate of mercury. It is notan uncommon prac-
tice to inject a solution of a grain or two grains of oxymuriate of mer-
cury into sinuses, for the purpose of stimulating the vessels. If the
sinus has existed for a considerable time, the oxymuriate of mercury is
frequently absorbed, and the mouth becomes affected in the same man-
ner as if the mercury had been absorbed into the system by rubbing it
into the skin, or taking it into the stomach. This proves that old gra-
nulating surfaces have the power of taking in, by absorption, a fluid of
this description. I have known what is commonly called the black wash,
which is composed of the liquor calcis and the submuriate of mercury,
when applied to the surface of ulcers, produce an effect upon the mouths
of persons who are easily affected by mercury. I believe that the wash
of the liquor calcis and calomel often produces good effects in the cure
of sores, by the mercurial action which it excites in the system, and not
merely by its local effects on the sore to which it is applied. Ulcers,
are, however, frequently the means of producing baneful effects upon the
constitution, by the readiness with which they absorb any substances
which are applied to them. Thus, arsenic applied to the surfaces of
sores, is very frequently absorbed into the system ; and on this account,
arsenic is to be regarded as a very dangerous external remedy. With
respect to the use of arsenic as an internal remedy, it ought never to be
employed without extreme caution, and unless the patient is watched
from day to day.

Case — I remember a case in the other hospital, of a patient who was
brought in with a fungus of the eye, and who was under the care of
Mr. Lucas, a man of great skill in his profession, and the father of the
present surgeon of that name. Mr. Lucas ordered a solution of arsenic
to be applied to the part. After it had been used for three days, the
man complained of pain in the stomach, but this was not supposed to
arise from the use of the solution. The application was continued ; the
pain in the stomach became excessive ; convulsive tremors of the mus-
cles succeeded, and the patient died. I was quite sure that he died
from the influence of arsenic in the system ; and, upon examination of
the body after death, I found the stomach in the highest degree inflamed,
and exhibiting the peculiar appearance which is produced by arsenic,
and not by poisons generally. I believe, therefore, that this person died
from the application of the arsenical solution. Quacks are in the habit
of destroying tumours of the breast by the use of arsenic. Women are



70



ON GRANULATION.



sometimes, though very rarely, foolish ; and they will undergo any tor-
ture which is not inflicted by a knife, rather than submit to an operation
that would not give them a tenth part of the pain which they suffer
from such applications. They go to a person who tells them of the
number of cures he has performed by means of a specific used for the
purpose of destroying scirrhous affections ; and, indeed, these quacks
very frequently destroy the scirrhous part, and the patient too. Mr.
Pollard, a surgeon, told me, the other day, of a person in town, who
applied an arsenical application for a scirrhous affection of the breast, in
consequence of which the patient died in less than a week. I had myself
occasion lately to perform an operation for a scirrhous breast, to which
arsenic had been applied. I asked the woman which gave her most
pain, the application of the arsenical preparation or the operation. She
replied, that the pain of the operation was not so great as that of the
application, and that the arsenic had been applied ten or eleven times.
The consequence of these applications is, that they become absorbed
into the system, and produce derangement of the stomach, the intestinal
canal, and the nervous system, and sometimes paralysis.

While I am on this subject, I will mention a case to you which oc-
curred in this town, and which I should have scarcely believed, if it had
not come within my own knowledge. A person in this metropolis hap-
pened to have bow shins. It was a part of his duties to teach ladies to
draw and paint, and in the prosecution of this branch of his profession,
he found his bow shins, as he himself declared to me, a very great evil.
He felt that his merits were less fairly appreciated, and his instructions
less kindly received, by reason of the convexity of his shins ; he was
persuaded, in short, that his low shins stood between him and his pre-
ferment. Under this impression, he went to a very noted person in this
town, and showing him his bone, said to him, “ Pray, Sir, do you
think you can make my legs straight ? ” “ Sir,” said the doctor, “ I

think I can : if you will take a lodging in my neighbourhood, I think
I can scrape down your shins, and make them as straight as any man’s.”
A lodging was taken ; the father of the patient assisted in the operation,
and all three of them — the father, the son, and the doctor — took a turn in
scraping down the convex shins. A great deal of rasping was required;
an incision of very considerable extent was made in the shin, the inte-
gument was turned aside, and an instrument which was at that time
contained in the surgeon’s case, called a rougee, was employed to scrape
the shin bone. When the doctor was tired of rasping, the father took
a spell, and the patient, in his turn, relieved his father. At last the
shell of the bone became so thin, that the doctor said they must proceed
no further with that leg. The other leg was then rasped in a similar



ON GRANULATION.



71



manner, and thus large tvounds were produced in both of the shin bones
The surfaces granulated very kindly, and very little exfoliation of the
bones took place; but, unluckily, the granulations would form bone,
so that up jumped the bones of the shin again. The doctor, however,
was not to be defeated, and accordingly put a layer of arsenic over the
whole surface. It was in consequence of the effects of this application
that I saw the patient. The arsenic was absorbed into the system, and
he became paralytic in his arms and lower extremities. A great num-
ber of exfoliations took place in his legs ; and he showed me a large
box, in which the exfoliated portions of bone were contained. I recom -
mended him to go into the country, and he went to Bath, where he
staid for some time, and got rid of his paralysis. This case made a
good deal of noise in town ; and there were some surgeons who expressed
a strong wish to prosecute the doctor. I recommended them, however,
not to take any steps until I had seen the patient himself; and when he
next came to me, I asked him whether he thought his legs improved,
and whether he would again undergo the same operation, at a similar
hazard of his life, to have his legs made a little straighter ? He replied
that he would ; and under these circumstances I was of opinion that, as
the young man was content, it was a folly to think of prosecuting the
doctor. The patient, in this case, appeared to be as great a fool as the
doctor whom he consulted, and deserved to be punished for his folly. I
have no wish to injure individuals; and I shall not, therefore, mention
the name of the operator. Some time has elapsed since the case occurred,
and the transaction is now almost buried in oblivion. One of the parties
is since dead ; not the person, however, who underwent the operation,
for he still lives, and is proud of his improved legs.

Opium, when applied to the surface of sores, is very readily absorbed
into the system. I believe that it is often a very useful application to
the surfaces of sores. I mentioned, on another occasion, a case in which
a tetanic affection was produced in a child, whose leg had been ampu-
tated by Mr. Lucas, the present surgeon of Guy’s, and where the appli.
cation of opium to the stump gave more immediate relief than I ever
remember to have witnessed. It relieved the spasms, and, as I believe,
saved the child. If opium, applied to the surface of sores, be absorbed
into the system, it produces excessive costiveness, extreme pain in the
head, and torpor of the system, which is only to be removed by the fre-
quent administration of active purgatives. The effects on the constitu-
tion, when absorbed from the surface of sores, are very much the same
as when it is introduced into the stomach.

Granulations possess nerves as well as arteries, veins, and absorbent
vessels. Granulations are sometimes extremely sensitive; but this is



72



ON GRANULATION.



far from being the case in all granulations. We shudder at seeing a
person handle a sore roughly, supposing that it must give the patient
extreme pain. Granulations which spring from parts endued with great
sensibility, such as muscles, are indeed extremely sensitive ; but many
granulations, such, for instance, as arise from bones, have no sensibility
whatever. If ulceration be produced to a considerable extent in an
exposed bone of the head, a probe may be put into it, while the patient
is quite insensible of your touching his head. If you do this in the
granulations arising from bones, and ask the patient whether you have
touched him, he will say, “ No; ” but if you apply the probe to the
edge, or near the edge of the wound, he will feel it. Granulations,
therefore, springing from bone in an uninflamed state of the bone, are
not sensitive. Granulations, however, which spring from the cancellated
structure of the bone, are, sometimes, extremely sensitive. I have, at
present, a patient who had a compound fracture of the leg : the fracture
was attended with abscess, and a small exfoliation of the bone took
place. In this case, when a probe was put down into the cavity, the
granulations from the cancellated structure of the bone were extremely
sensitive. When the inflammation passes away, the sensibility of the
part is diminished. The same thing happens with respect to granula-
tions springing from tendons, (as in the tendo achillis, for instance,)
which are entirely insensible. So granulations arising from fascia, and
the aponeurosis of muscles are endued with little sensibility. In general,
therefore, although granulations springing from parts of great sensibility
are sometimes exquisitely sensitive, those arising from parts in a great
degree insensible, or entirely so, as tendons, are not sensitive; a circum-
stance which you cannot at any time go round a large hospital without
having an opportunity of witnessing.

Granulations are very readily united to each other. The mode in
which union is effected, is, by bringing the edges of the two granulating
surfaces together, so as to produce the adhesive process. The surface of
the granulations will be covered by adhesive matter, and you have only
to apply the two surfaces to each other to produce an union. The know-
ledge of this principle is very often useful in the practice of surgery. A
man has a considerable portion of the scalp raised from the skull, and
the pericranium throws out granulations, whilst the raised portion of
scalp is also granulating. Instead of waiting for the tedious process of
the union of both surfaces, by granulations filling the cavity, you have
only to place one portion of the granulations upon the other, bind them
well down with adhesive plaster, and they will be sure to inosculate. In
this manner, a surface, which it would otherwise have taken a long time
to close, will be healed in a few days. The cavity of the scrotum, after



ON GRANULATION.



73



removal of the testicles, is often covered with a great number of granu-
lations, by bringing the surfaces of which together with adhesive plaster?
a wound, which would otherwise require weeks in healing, will be healed
in a very short time. It was upon this principle, namely, that of bring-
ing together the granulating surfaces, that Mr. Baynton proceeded with
so much success in the treatment of ulcers; so that our hospitals are now
much less filled than they formerly were with those opprobia of our art.

The next subject to which I shall direct your attention is the closing
of sores by cicatrization.

The formation of the new skin with which a sore is covered over is called
cicatrization, which is produced in the following manner : — The vessels
at the edge of the skin form granulations, and these granulations unite
with the granulations of the surface of the sore. The granulations pro-
duced from the edge proceed toward the centre, and those on the edge
inosculate with those on the surface of the sore, and are united by the
adhesive process. The vessels become elongated from the edge of the
sore, and proceed in radii from the circumference to the centre. Day
after day an addition is thus made to the cicatrix, until at last the vessels
reach the centre from every part of the circumference; when the process
of cicatrization is completed. It may be said by some persons, that this
is not the only mode which Nature takes for the formation of new skin,
for that it often happens that the process of cicatrization commences
from the centre of the sore. If these persons mean to say that insulated
portions of the skin are sometimes seen in the centre of a sore, having
no communication with its edges, there can be no doubt of the fact. But
how does this happen ? It is not that the centre of the sore has the
power of forming new skin, but the new skin in the centre is produced
in consequence of the whole of the skin not having been ulcerated away,
and granulations arising from the part of the skin which was left. This
only happens in irregularly-formed sores, where the healing process is
gone on to the centre, and then the sore has broken out in the circum-
ference. If granulations arise from any portion of skin in the centre, these
granulations produce new skin, and an insulated portion of skin is
produced, forming a part of the cicatrix, which is not afterwards ulce-
rated away.

When a cicatrix is formed, in the first instance it is extremely vascu-
lar ; but when it has existed for any length of time, the blood-vessels
become contracted, and it is whiter than the original skin. Hence, the
white appearance of the cicatrices after small-pox ; for, although
they are more vascular than the original skin, when first formed, in a
little time they lose this vascularity, and are endued with less living
power than the surrounding parts.

it



74



ON GRANULATION.



The readiness with which the surface of a sore is covered in by cica-
trization depends very much on its form. A sore of a circular form
requires a very considerable time before it will heal ; whereas a sore of
much greater length but of less diameter, will heal more quickly. You
may always pronounce, therefore, that a round sore will be longer in
healing than a longitudinal one, cateris paribus, as, for example, in the
same patient, where the constitution is the same. The reason is, that
the vessels have to elongate much less from the edge to the centre in a
longitudinal than in a circular sore. The form, therefore, has an in-
fluence on the readiness with which cicatrization takes place. Sores are
very often difficult to heal, from their situation. Thus, if a sore be
situated at the back of the leg, there will often be great difficulty in
healing it. Indeed, such a sore can only be healed by raising the heel,
and so loosening the skin, in order to give it a power of being drawn in,
to form a new cicatrix. By this means the vessels are more readily
elongated, and continually draw the skin nearer the centre of the sore.
It appears, then, that the form and situation of the sore have a very
considerable influence on the healing power.

Here is a model in plaster, on the table, representing the case of a
patient who had been severely burnt, and in which extensive deformity
had supervened on the cicatrization of the wounds. The chin had be-
come united to the breast, the arms to the sides, and the upper arm to
the fore-arm.

Now, in looking at a case like this, some of you might be induced to
exclaim, How abominably inattentive must the medical man have been
who had the care of this patient, for all these consequences might have
been prevented? If you said this, your censure would be culpable:
you have no right to say so ; for it is a case that may happen to any of
you. Deformities of this kind generally arise after the process of heal-
ing is completed ; they are the effects of the contraction of the cicatrices,
and not of the contraction of the skin at the time of the accident. Here
the skin is contracted so as to pull down the chin, and evert the lip, so
that the saliva runs over the surface of the breast, and is constantly ex-
coriating it. All these results proceed, not from the production of the
new skin, but from the contraction of the cicatrices after the production.
I say this from having seen, among many other cases of the kind, the
case of a child who was a short time since admitted into Guy’s. In con-
sequence of the contraction of the cicatrices, the upper arm adhered to
the fore-arm, and the thumb was drawn back so as to be immoveably
joined to the upper arm.

Case. I will mention another case of this kind. Some time ago, a

young gentleman, who was playing with fire-works, happened to be



ON GRANULATION.



75



slightly burnt in the forehead. His father, who was a very intelligent
man, showed considerable anxiety, and expressed his apprehensions at
the tune, that some horrible deformity would arise from this accident ;
for he had witnessed instances in which the eye-brows had been drawn
up, so that the patient had no power of closing his eyes, from a similar
cause. Granulations, however, very soon arose on the surface of the
forehead ; the sore healed kindly, and the father was delighted to see
what he supposed to be the favourable termination of the case. Some
time after this, however, I saw this gentleman, and upon inquiring after
the child, he told me that he was very well, but that a horrible deformity
had ensued from the accident : the eye-brows were drawn up, the eye-
lids elevated, and the forehead was quite wrinkled. This took place a
few weeks after the healing of the sore, in consequence of the contrac-
tion of the cicatrix ; and unfortunately this was a deformity incapable
of being remedied by any means which art could suggest. I have never
seen a case like that represented in the plaster bust on the table, where
the chin is united to the breast, which was capable of being cured. You
may, by putting a knife behind the bridle and dividing it, separate the
chin, to a considerable extent, from the breast; but whatever force you
may use for keeping the head back, the contraction will ultimately be
the same. There are some parts of the body, however, in which de-
formities of this kind may be removed ; as in cases in which the thigh is
united to the abdomen, where the bridle may be divided, and the joint
afterwards straightened ; but where the bridle is broad, as under the
chin, no operation will avail.

In the formation of cicatrices the original parts may all be reproduced,
except two. In the first place, new skin, though differing somewhat in
texture and smoothness, is still a substance similar to the original skin.
Skin may be defined to be a substance producing rete mucosum and
cuticle. Are both produced by the newly -formed skin ? Undoubtedly.
The cuticle is produced very quickly, and with respect to the rete muco-
sum, or covering matter of the skin, a little time elapses before it is pro-
duced ; but it is produced, as the following fact will show : — The new
skin of a Negro does not become white, as in that of Europeans, but is
at first red, and after a little time turns blacker than the original skin. I
was struck with this in the other hospital, in the case of a Negro, who
had been a sailor in a privateer, and had received several wounds in dif-
ferent parts of his body. I observed that the cicatrices were everywhere
blacker than the original skin. W e may, conclude, therefore, that the
skin which is reproduced is true skin ; that the cuticle is very quickly
reproduced, and the rete mucosum after a short period. The cellular
membrane is also reproduced, though it has at first the appearance of a

H 2



76



ON GRANULATION.



solid fibrous mass, which requires some time before it is drawn into the
reticular texture, similar to the original membrane. Tendons are very
easily reproduced. If the tendon achillisbe divided in an animal, it will
be reproduced in about a fortnight or three weeks ; but it will be some-
what larger than the original tendon. The same thing takes place in
the human subject ; as you may see from a specimen in our museum of
a tendo achillis which had been reproduced, and which is larger than the
original tendon. Every body knows that bones are reproduced ; not
only the shell of the bone, but the cancellated structure ; not only the
salt or phosphate of lime, but the cartilaginous substance in which it is
deposited. Nerves are also reproduced, but there is some little doubt
whether they assist at all in the restoration of sensation by anastomois.
Dr. Haighton made an ingenious experiment with respect to the union
of nerves. He divided the par vagum, or eighth pair of nerves, in a
dog, on one side, and then let the animal live for some time ; he then
divided the par vagum on the opposite side, and after suffering both
nerves to unite, he then divided them at the same moment, when the
animal died.

In tic doloureux, after the operation of dividing the nerve, even when
the sensibility of the part to which the nerve was distributed is not en-
tirely restored, and although numbness still remains in the cheek, the
painful sensation usually returns.

Case An old gentleman, from Bury, in Suffolk, had undergone the

operation of the division of the nerve for lie doloureux several times.
When he came last to me, there was still a little numbness remaining in
the lip, yet the pain of the tic doloureux was as great as ever. I divided
the nerve, but the operation did not afford him the same relief as before.
He came again some months after, and wished the nerve to be again
divided. The pain in the part had returned to its former degree,
although the numbness of the lip was much greater than before.

The parts of the body which are not produced, are — first, muscles,
in the case of a man who had a scar on the fore-arm, which appeared to
have long existed, I found that, instead of muscular fibre under it, a
tendinous structure had formed. A muscle, when divided, unites by
tendons, and not by muscle. Secondly, the cartilages of the ribs unite
by bone, and not by cartilage. (Sir Astley exhibited to the class a spe-
cimen of cartilage of the human rib which had been divided, and in
which ossific union had taken place.) This, however, will depend in some
measure, on the age of the person ; for in very young subjects cartila-
ginous union will be produced, but in subjects more advanced in years,
the cartilages of the ribs invariably unite by bone.



ON ULCERS.



77



LECTURE XII.



ON ULCERS.

In treating of this subject, I shall first describe the appearance of ulcers
in what may be termed their healthy state, I shall then detail tbe seve-
ral circumstances which render their cure difficult, and proceed to point
out to you the remedies which are found to be the most efficacious in
practice. An ulcer may be defined to be a granulating surface secreting
matter. When an ulcer is in a perfectly healthy state, the appearances
which it exhibits are as follows : — The granulations are florid ; their
blood-vessels possess a considerable quantity of arterial blood, and the
freedom of circulation produces this florid appearance. The granula-
tions are equal on the surface of the sore, rising a little above the edges ;
for it is necessary, in order that a sore should heal kindly, that the sur-
face of the ulcer should be a little more elevated than the surrounding
skin. The surface of the sore secretes matter which has a milky appear-
ance, or rather the appearance of cream. The edge is whitish in colour,
and adapts itself to the surface. In this manner the granulations spring-
ing from the surrounding skin are very nicely adapted to the circum-
ference of the sore, so that the granulations of the edge unite with those
on the surface. When, therefore, you see the surface of an ulcer red,
the granulations equal, the surface rising a little above the edge, the
discharge of matter healthy, and the edge of the sore nicely adapted to
the surface, you will say that this ulcer is in a healthy state. In order
to produce this state of the sore, the best practice which you can gene-
rally pursue is to apply poultices and plasters.

When you open an abscess, or when a wound is produced which can-
not be healed by the adhesive process, the best application is a poultice,
for the purpose of exciting the growth of granulations. This poultice
must not be too warm ; it should be gently stimulating, so as not to re-
press the growth of granulations, but to form a soft bed to which they
may spring. The effect of the poultice is, by its warmth and mois-
ture, to encourage such a degree of action as may promote the rising
of the granulations. When the granulations have risen to the edge of
the sore, then the practice must be altered ; and the object is to adapt
the granulations of the edge to those of the surface. For this purpose
adhesive plaster or unctuous substances are employed, with a view of
pressing down the granulations of the edge of the sore on those of the
surface, so as to make them unite. These are the principles of treatment
in the cure of ulcers. We first encourage the growth of granulations by
the application of the gentle stimulus of poultices, and when the gra-



78



ON ULCERS.



nulations have risen to the edge of the surrounding skin, we press down
the granulations of the edge on those of the surface, either by the appli-
cation of adhesive plasters, or of unctuous substances. The more
unctuous such substances are the better ; for the vessels will have a
greater facility in shooting towards the centre, and the granulations
embedded in this unctuous matter will more readily extend along the
surface of the sore.

Such are the principles of treatment applicable to ulcers in the
healthy state; we shall now proceed to consider the impediments to the
healing process which frequently occur, and which render a different
mode of treatment necessary.

The first circumstance which renders the cure of ulcers difficult, is
the too prominent state of the granulations producing what is vulgarly
called proud flesh. In this state, the granulations rising considerably
above the edge of the surrounding skin, are necessarily prevented from
uniting with those of the surface. In order to prevent the continuance
of this state of the sore, the common treatment is to apply dry lint to
the centre of the sore, and some unctuous substance to the edges.
The lint, by its pressure, prevents the growth of granulations in the
centre, while the unctuous substance allows the granulations on the
edge to proceed and inosculate with those on the surface of the sore.
The lint should not be applied to the edge of the sore, for if it be, the
granulations will be prevented from proceeding towards the centre of the
sore. The nitrate of silver, and the sulphate of copper, are employed
for the purpose of destroying luxuriant granulations near the edges of
the sore. Here our practice is just reversed. Lint is applied to the
centre of the sore, for the purpose of keeping clown the granulations on
the surface ; whereas the caustic is applied for the purpose of keeping
down the granulations which are nearest the edge of the sore. In this
way we promote the healing of the sore, forming a little circle by the
caustic from day to day until we arrive at the centre. Adhesive plaster
is used with the same intention, viz., that of keeping down the granu-
lations. The common adhesive plaster is, however, too stimulating
for this purpose ; a plaster, composed of equal parts of the emplastrum
thuris compositum, and the emplastrum saponis, is a much better
plaster to promote the healing of ulcers than the common adhesive
plaster. This is a point deserving attention ; because, if the applica-
tion be of so stimulating a nature as to excite inflammation and excoriate
the skin, we are often under the necessity of leaving off the adhesive
plaster. It sometimes happens, that the action is so great as to oblige
us to apply a sheet of lead to the surface of the sore ; when this is ne-
cessary, you may apply a piece of lint covered with the ceratum cetacei,
over these a piece of sheet lead, and round the whole a roller should be



ON ULCERS. 79

passed of about five yards in length. These are the various modes of
treatment in this state of the sore.

The next circumstance to which we shall advert, as giving rise to
difficulty in the treatment of ulcers, is a languid state of the sore, in
which its action is too slight. What is the character of such a sore ?
You may know that a sore is in this state, by the glossy and semi-
transparent appearance of the granulations ; instead of the florid hue
which characterizes granulations in their healthy state, a considerable
portion of them is bloodless. The fact is, that the vessels near the sur-
rounding parts have not sufficient power to throw the blood to the extre-
mities of the granulations. To remove this glossy appearance, and
produce a healthy state of the sore, the application most commonly
used is the unguentum hydrargyri nitrico-oxidi. This is a strong sti-
mulating application, which occasions a determination of blood to the
part, and produces a florid redness in the granulations, instead of the
semi-transparent appearance which they assume in the languid state of
the sore. It produces, however, a white appearance in the edge of the
sore, arising from the thickened state of the cuticle, which prevents the
growth of the granulations on the edge. This may be corrected by the
application of the unguentum hydrargyri fortius to the edge of the sore.
Lotions are frequently applied with the same view ; such as the sul-
phate of zinc, in the proportion of two grains to one ounce of water : or
the sulphate of copper, in the proportion of one grain to three ounces of
water. The oxymuriate of mercury, and the liquor calcis, are also used
for the same purpose. In addition to these applications, it will be ne-
cessary to bind up the sore with a roller, and to allow the patient to take
a great deal of exercise; for, without exercise, a healing disposition will
not be produced in the sore.

It will be highly useful in these cases to employ some stimulating
plaster, such as the emplastrum galbani compositum, for the adhesive
plaster will not answer the purpose : the sores are languid, and the ob-
ject is to increase the action in the part; this will be greatly assisted
by giving the patient a nutritious diet, allowing him at the same time
to take exercise, and, in fact, by doing every thing to improve the con-
stitution.

Well, the next stage of ulcers we come to, is that to be met with in
patients on their admission into the hospitals. W hen the surgeon goes
round the hospital on the first day after the taking in, he will meet with
a number ot persons with inflamed ulcers on their legs ; and what, I ask
of you, is the character of these sores ? You know that there is a serous
discharge from these wounds, a bloody ichor, composed of serum and
the red particles of the blood — a disposition, in many cases, to slough



80



ON ULCERS.



— that the surface is covered with a brown incrustation, and the skin
and surrounding parts are highly inflamed. Well, then, you will find
that the same treatment which is applicable to inflammation in general,
will be of service in these cases, where inflammation has been kept up
for a long time to a high degree. Rest must be enjoined : the patient
must also keep in bed in the recumbent posture. Fomentations and
poultices must be employed : fomentations will tend to produce a secre-
tion from the part ; and poultices, by their soothing quality, to promote
the growth of granulation ; both will evacuate the matter from the
wounds. Then, with these applications, the vessels begin to form, the
sore assumes a better appearance, healthy secretions are thrown out,
and granulations shoot up, fibrous matter is deposited, and in a little
time you will have the skin covering the wound. Fomentations, poul-
tices, rest, and the recumbent posture, must be enjoined, and the pa-
tient must be purged. The best cathartic that you can administer is
calomel and compound extract of colocynth, five grains of each at bed-
time; and a draught of the infusion of senna and sulphate of magnesia
on the following morning. By this plan you will do more to subdue
the inflammation than by any other I know. If the part in the neigh-
bourhood be much inflamed, leeches had better be applied near the cir-
cumference of the ulcer : with this treatment, in a very few days granu-
lations will spring up, pus will be secreted, and the surrounding edges
will assume a healthy appearance. Without, however, attending to the
constitutional treatment, all your local applications will be of very little
avail.

Gangrenous Ulcers This kind of ulcer you will very frequently

see in a man who has been in poverty and distress for a long time, going
up and down the streets of London, looking out for an asylum where he
may rest his head ; this person comes to the hospital, at last, in a re-
duced and emaciated state. When you see a wound of this description,
you will know it by the surface being perfectly free from discharge ;
the surrounding edges of a livid appearance, with small vesicles or
blistered spots on them ; and the patient suffering much from irritative
fever. Seeing this state of the wound, then, you enjoin the patient the
recumbent posture, which is essentially necessary to promote the sepa-
ration of the dead parts. The principle of treatment in these cases is to
produce a very slight increased action in the part. Sometimes, when
the action is excessive, you must, on the contrary, soothe the part ; —
both will be sometimes good. When there is debility of the part, a
slight stimulus should be employed ; but when there is excessive action,
it is to be avoided.

The best application that I know for producing a slight stimulus and



ON ULCERS.



81



checking gangrene of the part, is the nitric acid ; there is none equal to
this : fifty drops of it to a quart of distilled water, will be found a most
useful remedy. The acid may be increased to a drachm ; this may be
done or not, just as it may give pain to the part ; but, generally, the
average quantity is fifty drops. I have seen, in a short time after this
application, a quick separation of the parts from sloughing, to which
there is always a tendency ; and healthy granulations spring up, being,
as the chemists would call them, oxygenated ; that is to say, the carbon
being thrown off from the arterial blood in the vessels with which they
are supplied. Here the granulations are of a beautiful florid red : this,
then, is a most useful remedy.

Oiled silk should be applied to the wound, so as to prevent the smell
arising from the parts tainting the room : for it is always considerable
when the process of sloughing is taking place, and granulations are
arising; an advantage, though a slight one, compared with the others,
in the use of the nitric acid, is, that the offensive smell is nearly taken
away by it, the sulphuretted hydrogen is destroyed. Another very
good application to sores of this kind is nitre, in the proportion of one
drachm to a pint of water ; this agrees very well with the sore, and has
the same effect, though in a diminished degree. It appears that all the
combinations of the nitric acid are good. Sulphuric acid is of use also
in these cases, six drops of the acid to an ounce of water. The muriatic
acid has not the same effect as the other two. If nitric acid be applied
to the wound, the granulations will assume a red and healthy look ; if
the sulphuric be; they will have nearly the same appearance ; but if the
muriatic acid be put to the wound, it will be seen that it will have a
comparatively slight effect on the granulations, and, therefore, it is an
inferior remedy in the treatment of these wounds. Poultices made of
port wine, porter, dregs of lees, yeast, a large spoonful of it to a pint of
meal, may be all used. Gentlemen, you must have recourse to a great
variety of applications: for, after you have tried one, which at the be-
ginning did good, you will, from the wound getting worse under its
use, be obliged to change it for another, and so on. There is at this
time a girl in the other hospital with sloughing of the pudendum ; a
variety of means have been used, all of which, at the outset, relieved
her a little ; but none continued to do her good for any length of time,
and she will, most probably, in the end, fall a victim to the disease : it
is upon this account that I mention to you so many remedies. The
carrot-poultice is also a very good application. The constitution of the
patient must be attended to, or else the local means will do very little ;
therefore, local applications must be aided by constitutional remedies ;
and what is the best medicine that you can administer? — opium and



82



ON ULCERS.



ammonia, gentlemen ; twenty drops of tincture of opium, three times
a-day, with ten grains of the ammonia, in an ounce and a half of
camphor mixture, and a little (one drachm) of compound tincture of
cardamom.

This is the medicine which will agree best with the patient. He
must be well nourished, or at least he must have as much as his diges-
tive powers will allow ; port wine also must be given, and spirits must
be allowed to those who have been addicted to their use. By brandy
and opium I have seen these sores cured ; in fact, they are our sheet-
anchors in the treatment of these ulcers. But more of this in another
lecture, as I shall have to speak of gangrene again.

The next kind of ulcer that I come to is the Irritable Ulcer.

This sore is extremely difficult to cure. How then are you to know
it ? When you find the granulations most unequal ; in some parts being
very high, in others very low. The discharge from the wound consists
of a bloody pus. I do not know what to compare it to better (though
it is not quite so good) than strawberry cream. ( A laugh.) It is pus
mixed with the red particles of blood. This sore may be known by the
inequality of the granulations, the nature of the discharge, and the
great pain and tenderness in the part ; so that the patient, when touched
in that part, is like a sensitive plant. As you will be sure to find con-
siderable difficulty in the treatment of these sores, I will tell you, the
best application that you can make use of is one compounded of the
cetaceous ointment, gray oxide of mercury, and powdered opium : —
Unguent Cetacei
Hydr. Mit. a 3[ss.

Pulv. Opii 3j. M.

Fiat unguentum.

This must be spread on lint, and applied to the part twice a-day.
What are the internal remedies you ought to exhibit in these cases,
gentlemen ? — calomel and opium : these are the medicines on which
you are to rely ; a grain and a half of calomel and a grain of opium
morning and evening. Nothing will be of so much service as this me-
dicine. It should not be carried so far as to produce ptyalism, or to
affect the constitution severely ; but it should be given so as to restore
the secretions, and to diminish the action of the nervous system. The
calomel will do the first, and the opium will lessen the nervous irrita-
bility. The treatment of inflammation has been improved of late by
calomel and opium. The effect of this medicine in chronic inflammation
may be seen in the disease called iritis. Here calomel and opium may
be exhibited ; nor should a deposit of white matter, having the appear-
ance almost of pus, into the anterior chamber of the eye, be any barrier



ON ULCERS.



83



to their use. Give five grains of calomel and a grain of opium night
and morning ; and in the space of a week, if the eye has not suffered a
good deal, or become disorganised, this remedy will correct the inflam-
mation. We use other aids, such as the compound decoction of the
sarsaparilla. Some think it a placebo ; others have a very high opinion
of its efficacy. I do not think much of it myself in those cases ; but,
after the use of mercury, it diminishes the irritability of the constitution,
and soon soothes the system into peace. With this view, its aid, com-
bined with other remedies, may be of use.

So much for irritable ulcers. Before I conclude this part of the
subject, however, I will mention a case which just occurs to me: I
allude to that of Mr. Lucas, the surgeon of the other hospital. That
gentleman, in consequence of having pricked his finger, had a very
irritable sore, which obliged him to go into the country, where he re-
mained for a considerable time. The remedy which he found most
efficacious for bringing the sore into a healing state, was the application
of a solution of nitric acid, very much diluted, and the compound de-
coction of sarsaparilla. From the latter he thought he derived consider-
able benefit. By these means, and by attention to his general health,
he affected a cure ; but his life was in considerable danger, from the
irritable sore produced by this apparently trivial accident.

Sinuous Ulceration . — It is necessary to explain here well what I
mean. Whenever, therefore, a sore extends to any considerable depth,
so that the discharge has to travel through a channel before it arrives
at the surface, such an ulceration is called sinuous. There are two rea-
sons why these ulcerations are difficult to heal : first, from matter form-
ing at the bottom, forcing its way through the passage, and thereby
disturbing the healing process, by breaking down whatever adhesions or
granulations form on its sides ; and, secondly, the same interruptions
occur from the actions of the muscles, when these ulcerations happen
in muscular parts. Thus, if the healing process has commenced in
fistula in ano, when the sides of the fistula are at rest, the first time that
the person has a motion, the sphincter ani, by its action, will destroy all
the newly-formed adhesions and granulations ; consequently, if the
sphincter be divided, and the parts have rest, granulations will form,
remain undisturbed, and a cure be the result : this clearly shows that
the motions of the sphincter occasioned a continuance of the evil. Some-
times in these cases, for the purpose of exciting the adhesive inflamma-
tion, injections are used. Now, which is the best? In my opinion,
tinctura lyttse : it readily produces inflammation ; adhesive matter is
thrown out ; you take care to keep the sides of the sinus in contact ;
and by these means the parts will permanently coalesce. Sinuses of the



84



ON ULCERS,



rectum, however, are seldom cured without an operation ; indeed, I
have met with but two such cases : one was that of a gentleman who
came from the north of England ; he had been annoyed by a fistula on
each side of the anus, one of which was operated upon by the late cele-
brated Mr. Hey, of Leeds. He was cured on that side by the opera-
tion ; but as it was attended with great loss of blood, tile patient was too
much frightened to be cut again, and came to town for my advice. I
examined him, and finding that there was considerable space between
the anus and fistula, I advised him not to submit to the operation, and said
that I would try to relieve him without it, I injected first port wine and
water : this did not answer — it was not sufficiently powerful. I there-
fore threw in port wine alone, and succeeded in obliterating the canal. I
was fortunate in this instance ; for I can assure you that fistula in ano is
seldom, very seldom, completely cured without an operation. When you
do not succeed by injection, you may employ the caustic bougie. Still
pressure will be necessary ; and it is quite impossible that you can suc-
ceed without it. AVhen the fistula is very deep, it may be divided into
two ; or a seton may be introduced, and kept in for a fortnight or three
weeks, with a view of stimulating the parts for the purpose of filling
the cavity with granulations.



LECTURE XIII.

THE SUBJECT OF UECEBS CONTINUED.

In this evening’s lecture, I shall continue the subject of ulceration.
Ulcers are frequently formed for the purpose of allowing the discharge
of extraneous bodies ; when such substances become lodged, therefore,
in any part of the human frame, inflammation is excited — pus becomes
secreted, which, pressing towards the surface, ulceration takes place,
and the extraneous substance is thus afforded an opportunity of escaping.
Ulcers frequently occasion, to a very considerable extent, exfoliation of
bone: here you can assist nature by applications which act chemically
on the parts ; apply, for this purpose, a lotion composed of muriatic
acid and water, or nitric acid and water ; this wash will dissolve the
phosphate of lime or earthly matter of the bone ; and by removing this
inanimate substance, the power of the absorbents will be increased, and
a quicker separation of the diseased from the healthy parts be the conse-
quence. The acids, however, have not so great an influence in these
cases as you might be led to expect from what chemical writers have
stated ; still, however, you will find them to be of use, and they should
therefore be employed.



ON ULCEUS.



85



Ulcers which occasionally form on the fingers and toes are sometimes
exceedingly difficult to heal, from an irritation caused by portions of
the nails. You may think this too trifling a subject to require a mo-
ment’s consideration ; but I can assure you the truth is far otherwise.
A nail, for example, from pressure or some other cause, shoots into the
skin beside it ; a fungus springs up : the surgeon applies caustic and
destroys it : in a short time it rises again ; the caustic is repeated, and
the fungus disappears : it speedily, however, returns, and will continue
to do so, notwithstanding all his efforts to the contrary, unless he re-
move the irritating cause. Now this cause is the projecting portion of
nail; as soon as that is got rid of, the fungus will cease to grow, and
the ulcer immediately heal. The best methods to adopt for the purpose
of radically relieving these troublesome affections are as follow : — Pare
down the nail as thin as you can without producing bleeding, then
raise it a little, and introduce between it and the sore a small piece of
lint; in this way the irritating cause may generally be removed. It
sometimes happens, however, that the sore is so exceedingly irritable,
that even lint cannot be lodged on its surface without producing great
increase of inflammation and pain ; in such cases, what I do is this : —
with a pair of scissors I slit up the nail on that side where the disease
exists, and then with a pair of forceps turn back and completely remove
the divided portion. This is a very painful operation certainly, but I
have known persons get well by this treatment in ten days, where the
complaint had for months resisted every other. The applications to be
used after the operation are of little importance ; poultices are the best,
and these will be required but for a very limited period ; for the irrita-
ting cause having been removed, the fungus will soon disappear. The
next best plan to be adopted, for curing these cases, is the application
of a blister ; this brings away the cuticle, and often the nail along with
it. The most lenient method is the one first mentioned, viz. the intro-
duction of a piece of lint. Mr. Hunter, in alluding to this disease, said
that the parts were not in a state of harmony. This is very true, and
a very proper expression ; he also applied it to those cases where a dis-
ease in the gland producing the nail, causes the nail to turn black ; such
affections are not uncommon, and are often thought to be syphilitic, and
I have frequently known persons salivated in consequence. This
opinion, however, is perfectly erroneous. You must wash the sore with
liq. calcis and calomel, and administer the pil. hydr. submur. comp, and
decoct, sarsa:.

Sometimes, in these cases, we arc obliged to dissect out the gland that
produces the nail; and though the operation is a most painful one for

i



86



ON ULCERS.

the patient, yet we are, for the purpose of affording permanent relief,
compelled to perform it.

Whitlow, what is it ? Why, an exceedingly painful swelling, ter-
minating in an abscess by the side of a nail. The principle is this :
the matter forms at first under the nail, but, being unable to force its
way through that horny substance, burrows under it, thus producing
excessive pain and irritation. Fungous excrescences often arise in these
cases, which induce the surgeon to apply caustic; this practice is worse
than useless. You should, after fomenting or poulticing the part, re-
move the loose portion of nail ; this permits the matter to escape, and
instantaneous relief is the result.

The next ulcer that I shall describe is the menstrual ; I mean by
this, a sore which is once in three weeks or a month covered with blood.
This complaint is connected with ameuorrhcea. In going round the
hospitals, you all must have observed that females will one day have
their sores covered with pus, and probably on the next, day covered
with blood. In fact, the menstrual ulcer is of very common occurrence.
You must wash these sores with liq. calcis and calomel, give to the pa-
tient the mist. ferr. c. myrrh, and pil. hydr. submur. comp., one ounce
and a half of the former twice or three times a-day ; and five grains of
the latter every night at bed-time. These medicines will generally suc-
ceed in improving the state of the constitution, by restoring the defective
secretions.

The next ulcers that I shall describe are those which arise from vari-
cose veins ; and here I shall detain you for a few moments, as the sub-
ject is one of some importance. The veins in different parts of the body
often become varicose, but those of the lower extremities by far the
most frequently so. This condition of the vessels may arise from a
variety of causes ; but the more immediate one appears to be either a
thickening of the valves, so that they are incapable of approximating,
or a rupture of the valves : in either case the effects will be the same —
the blood pressing in one uninterrupted column — the veins become dis-
tended and serpentine, and the valves widely separated from each other
— their arteries, by their powerful attempts to return the blood to the
part, soon excites inflammation ; and ulceration quickly supervenes.
What are the common effects produced here by the first desquamation
of the cuticle ? Why, the whole surface covering the diseased veins is
formed into a crust, under which a quantity of serum is secreted. The
first thing to be attended to in these cases is the recumbent posture : in
fact, this position is indispensable; you can do nothing without it.
Iiint wetted by the mercurial wash should be laid on the ulcers — oiled



ON ULCERS.



87



silk over these, and then the limb should be well and regularly ban-
daged, beginning at the foot. The bandage allows the valves to re-
cover their lost action, and consequently will be found to be highly
useful. Another great benefit is derived in these cases from opening
the veins ; indeed, they are so distended, that they may more properly
be termed lakes than rivulets. If you do not open the vessels, you will
find considerable difficulty in the progress of cure. The best plan that
you can adopt is to puncture them by means of a lancet, twice in the
course of every week as long as you think they require it ; let the ban-
dage be afterwards applied, and the parts kept wet by means of eva-
porating lotion. No danger whatever attends the opening of these veins,
and very great relief will be afforded by it. If the punctures, however,
at any time should not unite, but fret into ulcers, you must apply to
them the liq. calcis and calomel. It often happens that persons, who,
for any length of time, have had the veins of their lower extremities in
a varicose state, will find at night a great quantity of blood in their
shoes ; the crust before alluded to, coming off, is the cause of the he-
morrhage. Upon being called to a patient so situated, you put him in
the recumbent posture, apply a bandage, wet the part constantly, either
with the spirit wash or cold water, and in all probability you will soon
get rid of the disease altogether.

Pregnancy is a frequent cause of varicose veins ; so also is obesity.

It was formerly the practice, when the veins were in a varicose state,
to tie and divide them. This plan is still pursued by many surgeons ;
but it is one, gentlemen, that I have deprecated in my lectures in
this theatre for the last eight or nine years : it is bad treatment, very
injudicious, and fraught with great danger ; therefore, let me exhort
you never to sanction it. I have seen this operation prove fatal in two
instances in these hospitals ; therefore I was induced to say that it did
not succeed, and have for years spoken against it. A gentleman of
Nottingham informed me, that he had tied the vena saphena, for a vari-
cose state of the veins of the leg in a young farmer, in other respects
healthy, and the operation proved fatal. The same lamentable catas-
trophe occurred to a most respectable practitioner at Brentford ; and
both these gentlemen told me, that they would not again perform the
operation for the world. If I were to tell you all the cases in which I
have known it terminate fatally, I should recount at least a dozen.
Another overwhelming objection to the operation is, that when it does
not prove fatal, its ultimate effects are perfectly nugatory. If I were
asked which of the following operations I would rather have performed
upon myself, viz. the saphena major vein, or the femoral artery tied, I
certainly should choose the latter. When an artery is tied, the infiam-



88



ON ULCERS.



mation is above the ligature, but in a vein it is below ; in this case, the
vessel becomes terribly distended, the inflammation uncommonly se-
vere, and either extensive suppuration, mortification, or death, the
result

Mr. Travers has written an admirable essay on this subject, which
well deserves your attentive perusal.

Ulcers are sometimes occurring in the cellular membrane, forming
what we call chronic carbuncles.

When the constitution is impaired, from whatever cause, it fre-
quently happens that small swellings will form under the skin. At first
they are red ; then turn purple ; and ultimately slough. The ulcera-
tive process is slow in those cases. A white substance will soon be
perceived at the bottom of the sore, and as soon as this comes away,
healthy granulations will rapidly form, and the wound become healed.
Constitutional treatment, however, in these cases, must not be forgotten ;
for unless you improve the general health, the ulcers will not get well.
You should administer aperients, such as the infusion of senna, Epsom
salts, &c., and give alteratives — the Plummer’s pill will be found the
best. For females, where great general debility has given rise to the
formation of these sores, no medicine can equal in power the carbonate
of ammonia. I shall have frequent occasion to allude to this. I ge-
nerally give it in the following form : —

JJ. Ammon. Carb. 3ss.

Aq. Menth. Virid.f vss.

Tinct. Cardam. Comp. fss.

M. ft. mistura.

If any one medicine improves the nervous system when deranged
more than another, it is this. I have often prescribed it for females
when in a state of extreme weakness, and its effects are truly astonish-
ing : two table-spoonfuls of the mixture may be taken two or three
times a-day. If the poultices have not the effect of exciting the gra-
nulating process, you may wash the sores with the liq. calcis and calo-
mel lotion, or gently touch their surface with the nitrate of silver.

It not unfrequently happens that the skin in various parts of the body
gets into a state of superficial ulceration, and without any evident
cause. The best applications in these cases are the yellow wash : ungt.
hydr. nit., or the ungt. zinci oxydi. The internal use of the oxymu-
riate of mercury will likewise be found particularly beneficial and salu-
tary ; give it in the formula mentioned to you in a previous lecture, viz.
in conjunction with tincture of bark : a small quantity of this mixture
should be taken in a little white wine, once or twice daily, according to
the age and symptoms. This medicine will be found a very valuable one,



ON ULCERS. 89

when the above-mentioned ulcerations are connected with disease of the
mesenteric glands.

There is an ulcer often existing on the face, called noli me tangere ,
which name imports nothing more than that you must not touch it.
This disease has never been correctly described ; the truth is, that it is
an ulceration of the glands or follicles of the nose, those small cavities
from which you can squeeze sebaceous matter ; the ulceration extend-
ing deeply, at least even the cartilages of the nose become destroyed ;
the plan of treatment to be pursued here is as follows, you must get pre-
pared an ointment according to the following prescription : —

JJ,. Arsenic Oxyd.

Sulphur Flor. aa 3 j.

Ungt. Cetacei £j.

M. fiat unguentum.

You must spread some of this ointment on lint, lay it on the ulcer,
and leave it there for twenty-four hours ; then remove it ; a slough will
come away : you dress the ulcer with some simple ointment, and it will
generally heal. If the ulcer is not deep, you may cure this complaint
without using the arsenical preparation, by merely painting the surface
of the sore with a solution of the nitrate of silver. You must be cau-
tious, however, in your manner of using this application. A gentle,
man once came to me with an ulcer of the kind of which I am now
speaking, and which I painted in the manner described to you with a
• camel hair-brush. In the course of the day, when at Lloyd’s, he was
asked by some friends what was the matter with his nose ; for they told
him it was quite black ; and, in point of fact, it was so. I was not
aware, at the time, that a solution of the nitrate of silver would have
produced that effect ; and I merely mention the circumstance, that you
may be on your guard. Deep ulcers having a malignant aspect, often
remain in the faces of old persons, without producing any ill conse-
quences, though, from their appearance, they portend the most direful
effects. To such sores, the best application is the lotion, composed of
liquor calcis and calomel.

Ulcers frequently form in joints, arising from inflammation caused
by a deposition of the urate of soda. Persons will come to you with
many joints open from this cause. A gentleman came to me from the
country, thus circumstanced. Several of his joints were quite exposed,
and the cartilages of some of them absorbed. I found in each of these
joints a lump of the urate of soda ; therefore, when it is necessary, you
increase the openings through the skin, remove the urate of soda, that
being the exciting cause of disease.

Occasionally, the thickened state of the edges of ulcers impedes the



90



ON GANGRENE.



healing process. These edges must be adapted to their surfaces, and
this may be done by means of the empl. galban. comp., which will re-
move the indurated cuticle, and stimulate the parts to action; if this,
however, should not succeed, you may use the ungt. liydr. fort, or
ungt. lyttae : or you may, with a lancet, scarify the edges, and this
method will often succeed when every other fails.

The edges of sores are sometimes very much inverted ; constitutional
treatment, as well as local, is necessary here. With respect to local,
the application of the nitrate of silver to the edges, and the black wash
to the surface of the wound, are generally all that will be required: and
the constitutional medicines I have so often mentioned to you must be
regularly given until the ulcer heals.

Some sores have their edges very much everted , and this affection is
commonly symptomatic of a cancerous diathesis ; the usual method of
treatment practised in these hospitals is to poultice such ulcers ; to at-
tend particularly to the condition of the general health, until the edges
have resumed a natural and healthy state. The admirable mode re-
commended by Mr. Baynton should be had recourse to, which, by ap-
proximating the sides of the wound, and thus facilitating the processes
of granulation and cicatrization, will more surprisingly contribute
towards the completion of the object we have in view.

LECTURE XIV.

ON GANGRENE.

Having traced inflammation through its adhesive, suppurative, and
ulcerative stages, I shall notv proceed to consider it in its most destruc-
tive form, namely, when it exists in such excess as to produce gangrene.
We find that inflammation, when it is extremely active, occasions a de-
struction of vital power. At other times, when there is a less degree of
inflammatory action, but where the powers of the part are feeble, the
life of the part will also be destroyed ; so that gangrene is produced
either by an excess of inflammatory action, where the powers are na-
tural, or by a less degree of inflammatory action, where the powers of
the part are feeble. Gangrene may be considered as a partial death.
This is its definition : the death of one part of the body, while
the other parts are alive.

The symptoms of gangrene differ according to the manner in which it
is produced. When gangrene is the result of high and active inflam-
mation, the pain attending its production is exceedingly severe ; the in-
flammation is very extensive ; there is generally a blush to a consider-
able extent ; and there is generally, though not always, a considerable



ON GANGRENE.



91



degree of swelling. The secretion from any sore which may exist ceases,
for the skin no longer perspires. The surface of the skin becomes of a
dark colour; it is said to become purple, but it is rather of a brownish
tinge. The cuticle is raised; a vesication is produced, and when this
breaks, it is found to contain a bloody serum. When this serum is dis-
charged, the skin assumes the gangrenous appearance, and becomes
perfectly insensible. The vesication extends to parts beyond the ulce-
ration ; thus in sores of the leg we frequently see a large portion of the
skin giving way, and the gangrenous vesications extending beyond the
ulcerative surface. The constitution suffers considerable derangement
from gangrene ; there is a high degree of irritative fever, and the pulse
is often exceedingly quick. The pulse is generally said to become slow
when gangrene takes place, but I have never observed this. I have in-
deed occasionally remarked but a few beats in a minute, because it is
very frequently intermittent. Still the pulse is quick, though occasionally
intermittent. It is said also to become soft, but I should not say that
this is the character of the pulse in gangrene. It is quick, very small
and thready, and generally irregular. Gangrene seldom occurs without
delirium, and it is attended also with vomiting and hiccough. Hiccough,
indeed, is the characteristic sign of gangrene, and it takes place though
the gangrene may be situate in a part very distant from the stomach ;
as for example, in the toe. The fact is, that when gangrene arises from
a diseased state of the constitution, the stomach is extremely deranged,
and this derangement of the stomach is followed by a spasmodic con-
traction of the diaphragm, producing hiccough. This symptom does
not arise from alteration in the action of the diaphragm, but from its
sympathy with the deranged state of the stomach. If you wish to cor-
rect hiccough, you may arrest it for a time by giving some slight stimu-
lus, or even by adopting opposite means. Thus a glass of cold water
will suspend it for a considerable time.

Such are the symptoms when gangrene is the result of excessive ac-
tion. But gangrene is sometimes the effect of a low degree of inflam-
mation ; as when it is produced by the application of cold. When a
great degree of cold has been applied to any part for a considerable time,
the part will become benumbed ; that is, its nervous powers will be
diminished : and when it is thus enfeebled, it will be unable to bear a
very slight degree of supervening inflammation, so that gangrene will
be produced, and the destruction of its life will follow. In this climate,
however, destruction of the life of the part does not in general imme-
diately follow. A person will come to the hospital with his feet be-
numbed ; he may have been wandering about the streets, unable to find
a place of refuge ; until he becomes, from this cause, incapable of walk-



92



ON GANGRENE.



ing. Great care must be taken in these cases not to apply heat very
suddenly ; even the common heat of the bed frequently occasions in-
flammation, which is extremely liable to proceed to gangrene, in con-
sequence of the diminished nervous influence of the part. I knew a
gentleman of the first consequence in this country, and whose death
occasioned perhaps as much regret as that of any one who has died for
many years, who lost his life from an act of imprudence. He had been
out shooting, and had exposed himself to severe cold; and finding his
feet benumbed on his return, he immediately put them into warm water.
The consequence was, that a gangrene took place, of which, notwith-
standing all the care that could be taken of him, he died. In this cli-
mate it generally happens that inflammation succeeds the application of
cold after an interval of two or three days. By the use of some slight
means of treatment this inflammation is generally suspended, and it is
by the repetition of the inflammation rather than by its severity that
the powers of the part become at last exhausted. In colder climates
than our own the part exposed to cold becomes white, and the suspended
circulation is commonly restored by rubbing the part with snow. If it
be not very carefully treated, however, inflammation and sloughing is
apt to come on. If a part be completely frozen, inflammation frequently
ensues in a short time, and after continuing for a few hours, is followed
by a destruction of the vital power.

These are the symptoms which we observe in cases where gangrene is
the result either of a high degree of inflammatory action, or of dimi-
nished power. When gangrene is produced by either of these causes,
the process of separation soon commences. This process is one of the
most curious operations of nature in the human body. There is nothing
more extraordinary to my mind than the power which nature possesses
of separating even large members without any danger from hemorrhage,
or the smallest jeopardy to life. Thus we see a limb of considerable
size separated without in the slightest degree endangering the life of the
patient. There is an instance of this at the present time, in the other
hospital, in a case of popliteal aneurism, which will afford you an
opportunity of judging of this process of separation for yourselves. The
first appearance which we observe after the destruction of the life of any
part, is a white line, which nature forms for the separation of the dead
from the living parts. For this white line we anxiously look, since it
is the barrier which nature sets up between the dead and the living parts,
and it becomes a criterion of the cessation of the gangrenous disposi-
tion. At this white line the cuticle is raised. This elevation of the
cuticle is a vesication, which forms a line of circumvallation around the
gangrene. When the cuticle becomes separated, as it will in two or




ON GANGRENE.



93



three days, we find a chasm beneath it, produced by the absorption of
the living skin in contact with the dead. The living skin is taken up
by the absorbent vessels into the constitution, and in this manner the
living parts are separated from the dead by a process of nature. If we
were to reason a priori on this subject, it might be expected that the
absorbent vessels would rather remove the dead portion of skin in con-
tact with the living; but this is not the case. The absorbent vessels
act on tlie living parts, but not on the dead : nor is the dead skin ab-
sorbed after the time when granulations have formed, but it becomes
loose, and ceases to attach to the surrounding parts ; the chasm formed
by the absorbent vessels affording an opportunity for the separation.

The next part which begins to separate is the cellular tissue imme-
diately under the skin. Gangrene proceeds to much greater extent in
the cellular tissue than in the surrounding skin, because the cellular
membrane is a part of weaker living powers. It is for this reason
that a sloughing disposition in sores extending to the cellular mem-
brane is so dangerous. A small chancre beginning at the puden-
dum of the female, and sometimes in the penis, will frequently occasion
destruction of life in the part. Some persons have absurdly supposed
that these sloughing sores are not chancres, because they have not the
common venereal character. But how does this happen ? If a chancre
forms in the pudendum of an irritable female, and has a sloughing dis-
position, it extends into the cellular tissue, inflames to a high degree,
and produces gangrene. In this manner the character of the chancre
becomes destroyed. There is at this time an unfortunate female in the
other hospital, who has lost a considerable portion of the external organs
of generation, in consequence of a sloughing chancre. The hospitals
teem with such cases : and indeed this deplorable result is always to be
expected when a sloughing chancre extends into the cellular tissue, a
part naturally weak, and rendered weaker in these persons from their
irritability and mode of life.

1 he next part which separates is muscle. Muscles separate nearly
opposite the edge of the skin. Wherever the skin separates, the muscle
gives way ; a line of separation is formed, and the living portion of
muscle is taken away from the dead. This is not the case with tendons;
these, like the cellular tissue, do not separate opposite the skin, but at a
considerable distance from the part at which the sloughing takes place.

If a tendon is exposed in the palm of the hand, by a sloughing ulcer,
it separates at the wrist, for it is incapable of resisting the inflammation,
in consequence of its weak living powers, and separates therefore at the
part where it joins the muscle.

The nerves separate, like muscles, opposite the skin. But the most



94



ON GANGRENE.



extraordinary instance of the process of separation is that which takes
place with respect to the larger blood-vessels. What would be the re-
sult, if you were to separate with the knife the anterior and posterior
tibial arteries, without placing a tourniquet on the limb ? The person
would die in a few minutes. Yet nature cuts through these vessels,
and frequently divides the arteries I have mentioned, without a drop of
blood issuing from the limb. This happens in the following manner:
The blood in the vessels of the dead part becomes coagulated ; the
coagulum, however, does not confine itself to the dead part, but extends
to the living vessels which join it, and is, in this manner, glued to the
inner side of the artery, so that the vessels are, as it were, hermetically
sealed ; and not a drop of blood can escape by the side of the coagulum.
The same thing takes place in veins, the coagulum adhering to the inner
side of the living vein, so that no blood can escape. If you amputate
a limb at a considerable distance from the part at which gangrene has
commenced, you will still find the vessels sealed. The first amputation
which I ever performed, was in the case of a gentleman who had a gan-
grenous ulcer near the head of the tibia. In this case it was necessary
to amputate above the knee, as sufficient skin would not have been left
if the amputation had been performed below. When I loosened the
tourniquet, I was surprised to find no femoral artery. On a closer
examination, I found that the inner side of the femoral artery was com-
pletely plugged up, and sealed by the coagulum, which had extended
at least six inches above the place at which the gangrene had occurred.
It appears, therefore, that the artery is not only sealed at the place at
which nature cuts through it, but at a considerable distance above it, in
order to provide against the danger which would arise from a separation
of the coagulum.

Bones, at last, become separated ; but this process is very slow, and
it is a long time before they exfoliate, loaded as they are with phosphate
of lime. Hence, we are often under the necessity of taking away bones
when the process of separation is in other respects complete. I am
anxious, whenever I have an opportunity in these lectures, to refer you
to cases actually existing in the hospitals ; and you cannot have a bet-
ter opportunity of observing the process of nature with respect to the
separation of bones, than in the case of popliteal aneurism, to which I
have before directed your attention. This man underwent the operation
for aneurism in the other hospital. The aneurismal bag had been
loaded with fluid blood for a length of time ; the process of gangrene
commenced at the ankle ; all the soft parts were absorbed, and there
is nothing now remaining but a portion of bone, which will also separate,
if we permit it to do so. The saw would quicken the process, but it is



ON GANGRENE.



95



unnecessary, for the bone will separate by the efforts of nature alone. I
knew a person in the county from which I came (Norfolk), whose leg
entirely separated by the process of gangrene alone. In the foot this
very commonly takes place ; in the calf of the leg it is not common, but
below the calf it frequently occurs. I attended one of the king’s mes-
' sengers, some time ago, who came from Germany, with a gangrene in
the foot. The foot separated at the tarsus, and the whole process went
on without any surgical operation, and with nothing but the aid of the
simplest applications.

Gangrene is frequently the effect of a debilitated state of the consti-
tution. Thus, if a man have been confined by long continued fever, the
nates are apt to slough and become gangrenous in consequence of the
imperfect circulation, arising from the position in which he has been
forced to remain. Some fevers have a greater tendency than others to
produce gangrene ; as for example, scarlatina. In slight cases of scar-
latina, the most horrible effects will sometimes arise from gangrene.
The tonsils will slough to a great extent, parts of the Eustachian tube,
and even the tympanum will separate, and large portions of bone
exfoliate. The worst effects of this kind are observed in those cases of
scarlatina where the fever is not the most violent. The measles are very
apt to be followed by sloughing, unless great care be taken not to irri-
tate the skin of the chest too much. In this town it sometimes happens,
that a large blister applied to the chest of a child labouring under
measles occasions a high degree of inflammation, producing gangrene,
and endangering the life of the'patient. In constitutions of an unfavour-
able kind, I have often seen the measles produce a slough forming a
black aperture in the cheek of the child, through which its food was
passed, and life soon destroyed. Mercury, if used to excess, often excites
sloughing, from the fever and consequent debility of the constitution
which it produces. Whatever, in short, weakens the constitution
much, disposes it to the production of gangrene ; for the body, when
thus debilitated, cannot bear any excess of action. When the applica-
tion of cold is the cause of gangrene, the effects are produced very much
in the same way. The powers of the part to which the cold is applied
are diminished, and this diminution of power leads to the destruction of
the part, under the first excess of action.

There are some parts of the body naturally constituted feebly; as for
example, tendons. When inflammation attacks a tendinous structure,
it runs very readily into a state of gangrene. Hence, the danger of
making incisions into a tendinous structure, which frequently affect the
nervous system with the highest degree of irritability, and produce
tetanic symptoms. It is not the injury to the nerves which produce*



96



ON GANGRENE.



tetanus, but the sympathy of the nerves with the injury to the
tendon.

It may be stated, as a general principle, that inflammation is the
cause of gangrene; gangrene very rarely happens without inflammation ;
but as there are some exceptions to this general principle, I will mention
them. I have seen, in a case of hydrothorax, a small spot in the legs
become at once black, without any appearance of inflammation, and
extend itself until it occupied a very large surface. Here the total ab-
sence of circulation, and not an increased degree of it, occasioned the
destruction of life in the part. So we now and then see aneurism pro-
ducing gangrene. In the case of popliteal aneurism, to which I before
adverted, the gangrene is produced, not by the bursting of the aneurismal
bag, but by the pressure of the bag on the vessels, occasioning the de-
struction of life in the limb below. I saw a gentleman a few months
ago, who was upon the point of death from the pressure of an aneurism.
His foot afterwards became gangrenous. He did not die, however ; for
a separation of the foot, and part of the leg, took place, and he ultimately
recovered.

So much for impeded circulation without inflammation, as a cause
, which sometimes produces gangrene. The division of a considerable
blood-vessel will sometimes produce the same effect. I believe I have
already mentioned in the lectures, the case of a gentleman who was
stabbed in the groin by a foreigner, with a dirk or sharp knife. He
was stabbed just in the femoral artery ; considerable hemorrhage took
place, which was stopped by a ligature on the artery ; but the leg after-
wards became gangrenous, and it was necessary to perform the opera-
tion of amputation. Since I commenced these lectures, I have seen a
most melancholy instance of a gentleman in the prime of life, who died
from gangrene, in consequence of an injury to the femoral artery. This
gentleman was thrown out of a gig as he was going down a hill, and the
wheel of the carriage went over his thigh. When he was taken up, it
was found that he had a simple fracture of the femur. Every thing
which attention and skill could do for him was done ; but some pecu-
liarities were immediately observed at the time of the accident. The
lower part of the leg was quite insensible ; it was censiderably swelled
and hard. After lying in bed fora week, the patient became so restless
that he wished to be removed. This was done in the gentlest possible
manner. He did not, however, experience the relief which he expected
from a change of position, and the swelling was in some degree increased.

I was then sent for ; and when 1 saw him, I was surprised to find
that gangrene had already commenced at the knee. This was hardly to
be expected from a simple fracture ; for it so rarely happens that the



ON GANGRENE.



97



femoral artery is injured by a fracture of the thigh-bone, that amongst
all the cases of fractured femur which I had seen in the course of my life,
I never yet met with an instance in which the artery was injured. How-
ever, from the immediate insensibility of the limb at the time of the ac-
cident, from its coldness, from the swelling which accompanied it, and
also from the pulsation which existed opposite to the fracture, I was led to
believe that the femoral artery was torn through. The question then arose
whether we should amputate or not. Upon examination, I found the
limb emphysematous ; the air had extended into the cellular tissue up
the thigh to the abdomen, and putrefaction had already commenced. I
perceived, therefore, that the patient had but a few hours to live, and
that it was useless to put him to the pain of an operation. Upon exa-
mination after death, by the medical gentlemen at Rochester, where the
patient resided, it was ascertained that the femoral artery was divided.
It seems extraordinary, when we contemplate the situation of the thigh-
bone, that a fracture of it should not in one case out of ten produce a
similar result. A little knowledge of anatomy, however, explains this
circumstance. The artery is enclosed in a sheath, which so far protects
it, and its elasticity yielding to the pressure of the bone, enables it to
escape in a great majority of cases from the occurrence of this accident.
The history of gangrene, as far as dissection enables us to judge of it,
is this : the excessive action of the part closes the blood-vessels, and the
blood contained in them becomes coagulated. This is a curious circum-
stance, which I ascertained by an experiment made on an animal. It
is a well-known fact in physiology, that if a quantity of blood be in-
cluded in a living vessel between two ligatures, at the distance of two
or three inches, this blood remains about three hours before it becomes
coagulated. To ascertain whether, if blood were admitted into a dead
vessel, from which the air was entirely excluded, it would coagulate as
it would in a glass out of the body, I put a ligature on the jugular vein
of an animal, and another ligature at the distance of two inches from the
first; then cutting through the end of the vein, I brought it externally
to the skin, so that it hung out from the wound. Having ascertained
that the blood coagulates in three hours and a quarter in a living vessel,
1 took off the ligature from the pendulous dead vessel, and found that
in ten minutes the blood had coagulated as firmly as it would in a ves-
sel into which a person had been bleeding. In a dead blood-vessel,
therefore, the blood becomes coagulated just as it would in a vessel out
of the body. If you attempt to inject a part after gangrene the injection
will not enter the vessel. There is a specimen on the table (Sir Astley
exhibited the specimen) of a gangrenous limb, where you may perceive
that the injection has entered only as far as the part at which gangrene



K



98



ON GANGRENE.



has commenced. Such is the state of parts under gangrene. They can
never be recovered, because living blood can never again circulate in

them.

The subject next in order is the treatment of gangrene ; but as I in-
tend to occupy a little of your time this evening by a very curious expe-
riment, I shall defer the consideration of that subject to the next lecture.
I have something to say to you, also, gentlemen, on another subject. In
the course of these lectures I have always considered it my duty to direct
your attention to what is going forward in the hospitals, and to illustrate
every subject, as far as possible, by a reference to cases which are
actually under your inspection.

A short time ago, I amputated a limb in the other hospital, in a case
of aneurism, which is extremely curious, and to which I am not sure
that there ever has been a parallel. Some months ago, a man under-
went the operation for aneurism ; the femoral artery was tied ; shortly
after, the pulsation disappeared, and he was soon after supposed to be
cured of the aneurism, and discharged. He returned to his work ; but*
soon after a swelling arose in the ham, without pulsation. The swell-
ing subsided in consequence of rest : but a few weeks ago, while the
man was at labour, the swelling returned with great pain, which in-
creased during the time he was in the hospital ; and, as there was no
prospect of his recovering a useful limb, amputation was resorted to. In
this case I found the femoral artery below the place to which the liga-
ture had been applied was conveying blood. As it was impossible that
the femoral artery could be pervious, the blood must have been conveyed
by anastomosis. It does now and then happen, that a blood vessel will
arise from the artery just above the ligature, and pass into the artery
immediately below the ligature ; by which means the circulation is pro-
duced. There is a beautiful specimen in the collection, where the bra-
chial artery had been tied, and blood was conveyed by a vessel not more
than three inches in length, from the part just above to the part just
below the ligature. This now and then occurs after the operation for
aneurism, anastomosis happening where it is not usually found, from a
short vessel running from one portion of the artery to the other.

The other subject, to which I mean to call your attention, is the ex-
periment which 1 made on an animal last Friday, in the other hospital.
This experiment, gentlemen, delighted me; I do not know that I have
ever experienced greater pleasure in my life than I felt in going home
from the hospital on that day. With respect to antidotes against the effects
of poison, it is well known that they arc, in a great degree, useless. It
is impossible, for instance, to get rid of arsenic from the stomach by
any remedy that can be administered. It is doubtful whether any man



ON GANGRENE.



99



ever recovered from the effects of that poison by means of an antidote.
5io with respect to opium ; when it is taken into the stomach in such
large quantities that vomiting cannot be excited, the patient cannot be
relieved by the exhibitionof medicine ; for where is the antidote against
the effects of opium ? A few weeks ago, a nurse in this hospital died
in consequence of having swallowed Opium. No relief was exhibited
to her; but can it be said, after what we saw on Friday, that no relief
could have been administered to her ? A short time since, a patient died
in the other hospital, under similar circumstances ; the quantity of
opium taken being so large, that vomiting could not be excited by any
means which were employed. I was myself, on one occasion, called to
a young lady who had taken two ounces of the tincture of opium. It was
ten o’clock in the morning when I first saw her; she was then comatose.
I tried to excite vomiting by the sulphate of copper, giving it in as large
doses as I could venture to administer ; which I have sometimes known
to succeed when all other means have proved ineffectual. It was how-
ever, unavailing in this case, and I sat by this young lady from ten
o’clock in the morning, until eight in the evening, watching the regular
process to death, without being able to administer to her the least relief.
Let me ask you then, gentlemen, whether an experiment of this kind is
not in the highest degree interesting, and whether we are not infinitely
indebted to the man who first suggested the means of administering re-
lief under such afflicting circumstances ? I am happy to tell you that
the gentleman to whom we are indebted for this suggestion is now pre-
sent ; that he is ready to have the experiment made upon himself, and
that so confident is he of the success with which it may be applied, that
he would have no objection, if I could permit it, to take a large quantity
of the tincture of opium in your presence this evening. I suggested,
however, that a little coloured water would answer all the purposes of
illustrating the use of the instrument. The syringe, which was brought
to me the other day by a very ingenious man, Mr. Reed, of Kent, is en-
tirely a new invention, nor do I think the merit of that individual in
the least degree diminished by what I have since learned. The appli-
cation of the syringe to the stomach, in cases of poisoning, is due to a
gentleman whose name I shall presently mention. Mr. Reed’s syringe
is a new contrivance, which has been formed upon a principle in hydrau-
lics (first applied, I believe, by Mr. Bramah) and which is capable of
increasing the force of the instrument to the greatest possible degree. To
give you an idea of its force : if I were to stand on a piece of wood, and
the wood were surrounded by anything which would prevent the
escape of the water, the force of the syringe is capable of raising me
from the ground. I do not wish to commit myself by any observations

K 2



100



TREATMENT OF GANGRENE.



on a subject with which I do not pretend to be particularly conversant ;
but I believe, gentlemen, the principle is this : When a fluid contained
in a vessel, having a large diameter, is thrown into one of very small
diameter, the result is, an exceedingly great accumulation of force.

Thus we see that piles which are driven into the beds of rivers, by
the force of immense weights acting upon them, are raised by the ad-
mission of a very small quantity of water under them, upon the prin-
ciple which I have just stated. Mr. Reed’s syringe is formed upon
this principle, and the valves are besides different from any which had
been previously employed in similar instruments. With respect to the
medical application of the syringe, however, for the purpose of removing
poisons from the stomach, we are indebted for it to Mr. Jukes, a sur-
geon at Pimlico, who published an account of it in the Medical and
Physical Journal for November, 1822, p. 285 ; and a further account
in the same Journal for June, 1823. Mr. Jukes 'originally employed
a gum-elastic bottle to be applied to the tube : but the improvement of
a syringe was suggested by Mr. Bush, of Frome.



LECTURE XV.

TREATMENT OF GANGRENE.

I n the last lecture we defined gangrene as a partial death ; we described to
you the symptoms which attended it, when it was the result of high and
active inflammation, and when it was the result of a low degree of heat.

We shall now proceed to consider the treatment which is usually em-
ployed to prevent gangrene, and to arrest the sloughing process. You
must endeavour to soothe the parts by the application of leeches, with a
view of checking the excess of action. It generally happens, in cases of
gangrene, that the body will not bear any considerable degree of deple-
tion ; but local depletion, by means of leeches, may be safely resorted
to. Thus, in compound fracture of the leg, for instance, gangrene may
be prevented by the application of leeches, when it would not be equally
safe to take blood from the arm. Soothing applications, such as poppy
fomentations and poppy poultices, should be employed to subdue the
excessive action which threatens the destruction of the life of the part.
It will be necessary, at the same time, to attend to the constitutional
treatment of the patient. In this metropolis, it is seldom safe to take
blood from the arm of patients to prevent gangrene. In the country a
different practice may be pursued ; and it will frequently be necessary to
take away blood in erysipelas, and other cases, in which we cannot and
dare not deplete in town, where the constitution of patients is broken by



TREATMENT OF GANGRENE.



101



intemperance, or enfeebled by deteriorated air. When you take away
blood, however, to prevent gangrene, do not take more than eight or
ten ounces, lest the vigour of the circulation, and consequently the
nervous powers of the constitution, should be too much diminished.
Two or three grains of calomel should be given at night, with a view
of restoring the defective secretions of the intestinal canal and the liver ;
and the liquor ammonise acetatis, with a few drops of the tincture of
opium, should be given several times in the day. By the calomel you
restore the secretions ; and by the opium you tranquillize the system
and diminish the irritability which leads to the destruction of the life
of the parts. Do not begin by stimulating the constitution too much
in cases of gangrene. The effect of opium may, in some respects, be
similar to that of taking a stimulus into the system, but it is by dimi-
nishing excessive action, at the same time that it increases the strength
of the body, that opium becomes so valuable a medicine in these cases.
The best means, therefore, of preventing gangrene, are to restore the
secretions by calomel, and to diminish irritability by opium, and, in
some cases, by taking away very small quantities of blood.

If the gangrene arise from the application of cold, the treatment must
be different. In these cases the action of the parts is feeble from the
diminution of nervous power, and it will be proper to restore it to a
healthy state by stimulants of the most gentle kind. For this purpose,
the best application is the camphorated spirit of wine, accompanied with
gentle friction. If you are called to a patient whose feet are benumbed
by the application of cold, you must sit by his bed-side, pour the cam-
phorated spirit into your hand, and rub it on his feet with the utmost
possible gentleness, so that the part may not be irritated by violent fric-
tion. When the first effects of cold are removed, it will be proper to
apply poultices to the part. The poultices must be cold, for warm
applications to the part are to be carefully avoided. One of the most
valuable of our nobility died of gangrene from an imprudence in this
respect. He was out shooting in December last, and his feet having
become benumbed-, he put them into warm water as soon as he returned
home. The consequence was, that his toe became gangrenous ; the
gangrene soon extended to the other foot, and he died from its effects.
When parts are frost-bitten in colder climates, you are aware that the
common practice is to restore the circulation by rubbing them with snow.

So much for the prevention of gangrene.

But as soon as gangrene has commenced, it will be necessary to apply
a gentle stimulus to the parts, with a view of supporting the action of
the surrounding parts which arc threatened with the destruction of life.
The application which I have found to be most uniformly successful



102



TREATMENT OF GANGRENE.



in such cases, is the poultices of stale beer grounds. The stale beer
grounds, which may be obtained in any public-house, should be mixed
with linseed meal, and a poultice formed of them, which will produce a
gentle and beneficial stimulus to the part, and prevent the gangrene from
spreading to the surrounding skin. Spirituous fomentations are also of
use for the same purpose. At the same time that this local treatment
is employed, means must be taken to support the constitution, which is
debilitated by excessive action. The best mode of supporting the con-
stitution is by the exhibition of ammonia mixed with opium. From
seven to ten grains of the carbonate of ammonia, with twenty drops or
half a drachm of the tincture of opium, should be taken two or three
times a-day, or even more frequently, as once every four hours. This
plan will generally prevent the extension of gangrene. Bark was for-
merly extolled, as possessing great virtue in cases of gangrene ; but it
is doubtful whether it does not do as much harm as good. For the first
two or three days the patient feels comfortable, and his health is im-
proved by its exhibition ; but after a short time his stomach becomes
loaded and oppressed. It first makes him costive, and then purges ;
and after a little time we are obliged to suspend its use. I am much
disposed to try in these the new form of this medicine, which agrees so
well with the stomach ; I allude to the sulphate of quinine. It is my
intention to give it a full trial in the first case of gangrene which I meet
with ; and I recommend you to try it yourselves in the cases of gan-
grene which may come under your observation. An excellent medicine
used in the other hospital is a bolus of five grains of the carbonate of
ammonia, with ten grains of musk, given every four hours. I have
seen this medicine produce the best effects in sloughing sores in the foul
wards, and in gangrenous sores, where the gangrene was much disposed
to spread. The musk has the effect of keeping up the stimulus of the
ammonia, which is apt to subside after a few hours, when the ammonia
is exhibited alone. A port wine poultice is an admirable application in
these cases. I mentioned to you, a few days ago, the case of a girl in
the other hospital, who had a gangrenous sore in the pudendum, where
a great variety of applications had been tried without an.y beneficial re-
sult. At last a port wine poultice was applied, and with such imme-
diate good effects, that, though I had before despaired of her life, the
last time I saw her the sore was brought into such a healthy state, that
there are great hopes of her recovery. Applications of turpentine are
often of use in these cases, for the purpose of stimulating the parts.
After great want of circulation in any part, from the course of the blood
having been arrested, sloughing sores are very apt to occur. Thus,
after the operation of tying the femoral artery, if the limb be suffered to



TREATMENT OF GANGRENE.



103



rest in the same position for a considerable time, a small gangrenous
spot frequently appears. In such cases the spirit of turpentine is the
best application. Yeast is often applied with the same view. A lotion
much used in the other hospital, for this purpose, is the formula which
used to be called the epithema lythargyri acetatis, but now called the
epithema plumbi subacetatis.

The following is, the mode of preparing it : —

Confect. Ros. f j.

Med. Rosae. y --

/ HcL

Tinct. Opii. ^ 3 jj M

Liq. Plumbi Subacet. '

This is an application which accords extremely well with limbs in a
state of gangrene, when the dead are separating from the living parts ;
it is a very useful application then in gangrene. During the sloughing
process, the nitric acid is the best application that can be used : when
the gangrene stops, and the line of demarcation is drawn, and the
sloughing process is commencing, the nitric acid may be employed in
the proportion of fifty drops to a pint of water. I have seen very good
effects from an application composed of vinegar and camphor mixture,
about four ounces of the vinegar to twelve ounces of the camphor mixture;
I have seen this of service when no other application had been used, as
in the case of a gentleman at Peckham, whom I attended with Mr. A.
These are the different modes of treatment for the prevention of gan-
grene, and the arresting of the sloughing process.

ON THE PROPRIETY OF AMPUTATION IN GANGRENE.

As to the propriety of amputation — there is no occasion in general
for amputation in cases of gangrene when the sloughing process is going
on, as you have an opportunity of seeing in the man at the other hos-
pital, where nature has performed the operation herself, without any
assistance; if the surgeon will be content to wait a short time, and the
patient is disposed also, you will find that the parts will separate as well
without as with an operation. Now the old surgeons, who observed
nature well, adopted the very same plan in their amputations as nature
pursues in these cases ; the skin separates the longest, the muscles next,
and then the tendons, together with the bones, which are left consider-
ably shorter than the rest, as you may observe from the specimen on
the table. When bones ulcerate, the tendon soon separates, and the bones
become covered in by skin and muscle; ’ the limb, however, before me,
was amputated. The cases in which you are called on to perform the
operation of amputation are when the patient will not be able to sustain
the shock to the constitution ; then, gentlemen, if gangrene be going on



104



TREATMENT OF GANGRENE.



in any part, or through the middle of the leg, by which the power of the
constitution will be nearly destroyed, you may have recourse to an ope-
ration ; but even here there will not always be occasion for it. You have
an opportunity of seeing in the other hospital at present, in a case to
which I have so often alluded, separation taking place above the centre
of the leg; there is no necessity to amputate always under such cir-
cumstances, and you can give the patient a chance of his life, without
resorting to it, if he dread the knife.

I say, gentlemen, in constitutional gangrene , never amputate till the
sloughing process has commenced, and healthy granulations are to be
seen on the sore ; for if an operation be performed, the parts will assume
exactly the same appearance after as before it. It is curious to see how
the loss of a slight quantity of blood will destroy life in these cases.
When I was a dresser at these hospitals, during my apprenticeship, a
case of sloughing opposite to the calf was brought in : Mr. Cline, my
old master, on going round the wards, said to the dresser, that the pro-
jecting ends of the bone had better be removed. There were some gra-
nulations between the bones, which, in sawing them off, the dresser did
not observe, and therefore cut through them ; little hemorrhage ensued ;
no ligature was applied ; yet, on the same night, the patient died. There
was a case under the care of Mr. Forster, in the other hospital, on which
he performed the operation of amputation : there was gangrene on one
foot, a slight gangrene on the nose, and the other foot. The leg was
amputated ; but the infection spread in the nose and foot, which, before
the operation, were slightly gangrenous : then, gentlemen, it is proper
to consider that amputation should never be performed till the constitu-
tion is in a sound state, and healthy granulations have appeared.

But with respect to gangrene from defective action, or accident —

When called to a person labouring under gangrene, arising from
accident or pressure on some important vessel, amputation may be per-
formed without the least hesitation. A girl was brought to this hospi-
tal, who, in endeavouring to reach something from the chimney-piece,
trod on the fender, which turned over on its edge, and she fell back-
wards ; there was a compound dislocation of the elbow -joint, together
with a wound of the brachial artery ; this vessel was tied by the dresser,
hemorrhage was arrested, gangrene soon afterwards appeared in the
finger, when, nine days from the accident, the operation of amputation
was performed above the elbow-joint, and the patient did extremely well.
A man was brought to Guy’s, from Woolwich, with popliteal aneurism :
the aneurism had acquired a great size; there was a gangrenous state
of the limb below, so that it was thought there was no chance of saving
his life by tying the artery ; therefore amputation was performed.



TREATMENT OF GANGRENE.



105



Before the operation the pulse was from 120 to 130. In the evening,
after the removal of the limb, I sent Mr. Callaway, who was my appren-
tice at that time, to see how the patient was doing ; he found that the
pulse had fallen to 90 ; and no stump that ever came under my care
turned our more favourably. Thus, instead of increasing the irritability
of the constitution, the source of the irritation being removed, the
health of the patient became improved.

OF GANGRENE IN OLD PERSONS.

We often find old persons afflicted with gangrene, from very slight
causes, and particularly those who are tall. The heart being naturally
weakened by age, the circulation becomes extremely languid in the feet ;
hence, mortification of the toes ensues. The appearances which the part
assumes are these : — at first it is red and painful ; the person, thinking
little of the matter, puts upon the affected part a piece of linen ; in a few
days the cuticle comes off, and there issues from the surface a sanious
discharge; red streaks are now seen passing from different parts of the
foot up the leg ; and the glands in the groin often undergo considerable
inflammation and enlargement; all the absorbent vessels of the foot be-
coming inflamed, produce universal redness of the diseased member.
Soon after this the gangrene begins to extend, destroys the whole of the
foot, and passes to the upper part of the leg, where it usually stops, as
it seldom reaches tile thigh ; the constitution becomes considerably in-
fluenced ; there is some degree of fever, and the cheeks are of a florid
red colour. This gangrene will not commonly destroy life, if attention
be paid to the patient. It generally arises from ossification of the arte-
ries — not of the large vessels, but of the small. These losing their
elasticity, combined with a debilitated action of the heart, give rise to
the disease of which I am now speaking. The earthy matter is some-
times deposited in great quantities in the large vessels; and here ( show-
ing a preparation ) is an example, in which the deposition of earthy sub-
stance has rendered the principal arteries of the leg, and even part of
the femoral artery, impervious.

I recollect some time ago a very intelligent surgeon telling me, that
he thought a certain nobleman, whom he was at that time attending,
had ossification of the arteries of the leg, and that it would some day
give rise to gangrene — of which gangrene his Lordship has since died.

\\ here ossification of the blood-vessels exists, very slight causes will
give rise to gangrene. A gentleman of the city, in cutting a toe-nail,
carried the knife too far, and cut the quick, as it is termed : the wound
soon became gangrenous and black, and in the sequel he died. I at-



106



ON CARBUNCLE.



tended a gentleman, an old surgeon, who, for the purpose of getting rid
of a bunion, had (most foolishly) put a lancet into it; gangrene fol-
lowed, and he died. I was lately sent for by Mr. Holt, surgeon, of
Tottenham, to see a gentleman, who, when cutting a corn, had carried
the incision a little too far, so as to produce bleeding : gangrene here
likewise took place. Old persons must, therefore, be cautious how they
finger their toes — (a laugh) ; for life being almost out, very little will
prove a complete extinguisher.

A poultice, composed of port wine and linseed meal, will generally be
found the best local application : and your internal remedy should con-
sist of opium combined with ammonia. You must not expect that these
cases will always recover. I have known, however, a single toe, a
whole set, and even the entire foot, to slough, and yet the patient do
well. In these cases you must never amputate — whether there be
healthy granulations or not, do not amputate ; for as surely as you do,
mortification of the stump will supervene.

The next subject of which I shall speak is

CARBUNCLE.

Of this I shall have but little to say, as many of the foregoing ob-
servations are equally applicable here.

When carbuncle is about to take place in any part, it is generally
preceded by pain, and at first a swelling of considerable hardness ; this
is occasioned by the adhesive inflammation ; the surface of the tumour
then assumes a livid redness and a spongy soft feel ; little ulcers now
form in the skin, which, from their number, give it a sieve-like appear-
ance, so numerous are the orifices : from these a white discharge passes
— this fluid resembles water and flour mixed together : and a man who
has seen much of carbuncle, knows the nature of the disease instantly
upon seeing the discharge. When the little openings are all formed
into one, the dead cellular membrane begins to escape, for it previously
oennot do so, from the smallness of the apertures. In gangrene of the
extremities there is not this mechanical obstruction to the sloughing of
the dead part. And though gangrene is generally difficult to cure, yet
carbuncle usually does well, except when situated on the head or neck.
Though persons will recover from carbuncles of an enormous size upon
the back, yet very small ones on the head or neck will often destroy
life; indeed, I never saw a patient who recovered from carbuncle upon
the head ; in these cases there is effusion between the tunica arachnoides
and pia mater. The inflammation which attends fistula in ano will
sometimes destroy the cellular membrane of the neighbouring parts,



ON ERYSIPELAS. 107

thereby occasioning an enormous quantity of the nates to slough, and
yet the patient shall do well.

Treatment . — The peculiar treatment of carbuncle consists in making
upon the surface of the swelling, at an early period of the disease, a
large crucial incision, for the purpose of affording the deadened parts
an opportunity of escaping ; then apply the port wine poultice, and give
the patient such stimulants as will tend to increase the vigour of his
constitution, and here we shall again find opium and ammonia our sheet
anchors.



OF ERYSIPELAS.

Inflammation of the skin is generally extensive. Why ? In conse-
quence of the surface being unbroken. Thus, when the pleura or peri-
toneum is attacked by inflammation, the whole of these membranes
usually become affected by it ; and also when erysipelatous inflamma-
tion invades the skin, it is not uncommon to see it run from one part to
another, till half the body is covered by it. Sometimes it is ushered in
by fever, and sometimes not. Certain constitutions are sooner affected
by it than others, and often its effects appear to be entirely local. But
unquestionably it affects the constitution more frequently than otherwise.
Its characteristic appearances are, a florid skin, with vesicles containing
a secretion of an amber colour under the raised cuticle. It is seldom
that the skin suppurates in these cases ; the cellular membrane, how-
ever, occasionally does. It is very common for erysipelatous inflam-
mation to terminate in gangrene. You must not consider all cases of
inflamed skin erysipelas. I have often seen cases treated as such, where
it would have been right to deplete. The best characteristic sign is its
vesicular appearance ; and this constitutes a specific difference between
it and common inflammation.

The head seems to be more commonly affected by it than any other
part ; it often succeeds the most trifling injury of the scalp ; and, like
carbuncle, when it occurs in this situation, generally destroys life. I
had the misfortune to lose a lady of considerable consequence from its
effects, where it came on after the removal of a small encysted tumour
from the forehead. It made its appearance three days after the opera-
tion, and all the exertions of Dr. Baillie and myself were unable to
arrest its progress. Thus a trifling operation on the scalp destroyed
life, in consequence of having been succeeded by erysipelatous inflam-
mation.

After a person has once had this disease, he is very subject to it again ;
and some persons appear to be predisposed to its formation.

It generally makes its appearance in spring and autumn, but seldom



108



ON ERYSIPELAS.



in winter, and not very often in summer. Whatever renders the body
irritable predisposes to erysipelas. In hospital practice, surgeons were
formerly exceedingly afraid to operate in autumn and spring ; for it has
often happened that the stimulating effects of adhesive plaster have pro-
duced this disease, and have led to the death of the patient. Sometimes
it is epidemic, and sometimes contagious.

Treatment of Erysipelas . — In this town th'e following plan is pur-
sued, and which, for London , is undoubtedly the best: — You at first
give calomel, for the purpose of restoring the secretions of the liver and
intestines ; then allow a generous diet, and administer the ordinary to-
nics ; or, from what I have witnessed, I would advise you to try the
sulphate of quinine ; it is a most powerful tonic, excites in the stomach
a genial warmth, and will often remain in that organ when bark will
not.

Dr. Marcet, now deceased, but late a physician of Guy’s, endea-
voured to ascertain whether the antiphlogistic or tonic mode of treat-
ment was best for this disease ; therefore he put two persons, having
erysipelas, into adjoinibg beds ; to one of whom were given tonics and
a generous diet ; to the other, salines and low diet ; blood likewise was
abstracted from the latter ; they both recovered, the former rapidly,
while the latter lingered in a debilitated state for a very considerable
period. You will find, where erysipelas attacks the lower orders of this
town, who weaken their constitutions by the excessive use of ardent
spirits, that gin may be sometimes advantageously employed as a re-
medy, at once being the evil and its cure ; the last two cases of this
disease which I saw in the other hospital, prove the truth of what I am
now saying : a man had erysipelas dreadfully severe ; his head swollen
to an enormous size, and his recovery, by every person, thought impos-
sible. It was discovered, one day, that his wife brought him some gin.
He declared that he was better from having drank it, was consequently
permitted its continuance, and, to the astonishment of all, he rapidly
got well.

Not six weeks after this, there was another man, similarly circum-
stanced, brought into the same ward ; and having, from the result of
the above case, formed a high opinion of gin (a laugh), I directed the
sister to give it here also ; and really this patient recovered as speedily
as the former.



ON INJURIES OF THE HEAD.



109



LECTURE XVI.

ON INJURIES OF THE HEAD.

Before I proceed to mention these, I will give you a brief account of
the nervous system ; a correct knowledge of which, however, can only
be acquired by assiduity in the dissecting-room. The nervous system
is composed of the following parts, viz. brain (which is divided into
cerebrum, cerebellum, and medulla oblongata), medulla spinalis, and
two sets of nerves — one set issuing from the brain, and the other from
the medulla spinalis. Beside these, there is also the grand sympathetic
nerve, which may be said to form a system in itself.

The nerves are freely distributed to every part of the human
frame, and are the means by which all voluntary and involuntary mo-
tions aTe maintained. It is impossible that a mere description of the
nervous system, in this place, however minute it might be, could make
you sufficiently acquainted with its anatomy ; for this can only be ob-
tained by the most careful and attentive examination of the dead body.
It is necessary, however, for you, at this moment, to bear in mind, that
an immediate communication exists between the stomach and brain, by
means of the eighth pair of nerves, or par vagum ; for, tinless you do
this, it is probable that an important symptom, which I shall presently
mention, attendant on injuries of the brain, will be but imperfectly un-
derstood. There is also another circumstance connected with the brain,
to which I wish particularly to direct your attention, viz. its being the
vehicle of the mind; or, rather, I might say, the medium through
which the mind is communicated. The influence of the brain on the
mind, and vice versa , will be amply demonstrated to you as I proceed.

Now, when the brain receives an injury, the symptoms stated to be
the result of that injury are, general loss of sense and volition, if the
injury be considerable ; but if not so severe, some portion of sense and
volition will remain ; for example, when you are called to the bed-side
of a person thus situated, you find him to be what is termed comatose.
If you speak sharply to him, he becomes roused for the moment, mumbles
some brief answer to you, again lays down, and relapses into his former
sleepy state: thus you observe partial mental faculties and volition still
remain. This state you should minutely note, as it will greatly assist
you in your after diagnosis; and you must be upon your guard that
you are not deceived here ; for a man in this condition very much re-
sembles one in a state of intoxication ; and this similitude often proves
exceedingly harassing to the surgeon. He is probably sent for to a per-
son, who, it is stated, has received a severe injury of the head. He finds



L



1 JO



ON INJURIES OF THE HEAD.



him with a very severe laceration of the scalp, together with stupor,
and sometimes even stertorous breathing. Not knowing that the indi-
vidual was intoxicated at the time of receiving the injury, the surgeon
attributes the above symptoms to concussion or compression, when,
after a few hours, the person recovers from his drunken fit, and it be-
comes apparent that he received no other mischief than a wound in the
scalp.

In addition to loss of sense and motion, the faeces involuntarily pass
off, from the sphincter ani losing its retentive power through the sym-
pathetic influence of the great sympathetic nerve — the voluntary power
of the bladder becomes for the time extinct — the urine is retained, and
you are obliged to pass a catheter for its removal at the very time when
the escape of the faeces cannot be controlled. But the involuntary func-
tions of no organ are so soon affected by injuries of the brain as those of
the stomach ; this arises from the connexion before explained to you ;
vomiting, therefore, is one of the first symptoms, though the faeces pass
involuntarily, yet there is such torpor of the intestinal canal, that pur-
gatives will not easily excite action, and there will be found consider-
able difficulty in procuring evacuations ; the pulse is said to beat labo-
riously ; for the heart being affected, it cannot readily get rid of its con-
tents. The pulse, however, is not slow, unless the body be at rest : for
upon the slightest exertion it becomes exceedingly quick ; the pupils
are dilated, and there is sometimes bleeding from the nose, which, when
the patient has been kept lying on his back, often occasions vomiting of
blood ; when the injury has extended to the basis of the skull, pro-
ducing fracture there, it is generally attended with bleeding from the
ears. These cases are very dangerous, and persons usually fall victims
to them. In addition to the symptoms already enumerated, there is
often partial paralysis, or hemiplegia ; squinting is occasionally pro-
duced ; the natural direction of one or both eyes becoming changed ;
permanent, partial, or total aberration of the mental faculties may also
>e added to the consequences already enumerated, arising from injuries
f the brain.

When asked to explain the difference between concussion and com-
pression, you answer, concussion is simply a shock which the brain has
eceived, more or less severe, attended with laceration or not : and com-
pression arises from either a depressed portion of bone, the extravasation
of blood, or the formation of matter : and from whichever of these it
springs, the symptoms will be the same.

In describing the symptoms and treatment of these diseases more par-
ticularly, I will first begin with Concussion. When called to a person
whom you find in a state of stupefaction, but not to a great degree;



ON INJURIES OF THE HEAD.



Ill



regular pulse, tranquil and regular breathing ; and the accident has
existed some hours, you will generally be justified in pronouncing that
the injury has been trifling: but when the individual has been first
seized with vomiting, is incapable of using any muscular power from
loss of nervous influence ; a total aberration of the mental faculties, with
intermittent pulse and breathing, these will be found the diagnostic
symptoms of severe injury, and the case a dangerous one. In simple
concussion, where the derangement is not so extensive as that just de-
scribed, and where the patient, upon being spoken to, raises himself, as
if awoke from a sound sleep, and where some power of volition still re-
mains, you will find one of the best diagnostic symptoms to be the
accelerated action of the pulse upon the patient exerting himself ; a man
in this state with a pulse at 70 , on being raised, or attempting to walk,
will have it inordinately quickened, it will instantly beat 130 in a mi-
nute ; this is a never-failing symptom, and where the patient can be
made to exert himself at all, will be found a sure characteristic of the
disease. There is also in these cases a greater action of the carotids than
in health ; they beat more violently, though not more quickly, if the
patient be at rest ; if asked what are the best marked symptoms of
concussion, I should say this increased motion of the carotids; the ap-
parent tranquil sleep ; the instantaneous relapse to that state after having
been roused ; the remarkable excitement of the pulse upon using exer-
tion, and insensibility having immediately followed the injury.

The diminution of the operations of the mind is often so great in con-
cussion, even where considerable voluntary motion remains, that you
cannot, even by hallooing as loudly as you are capable, get any other
answer from your patient, than ‘eh!’ delivered in a gruff under-tone.
I have known several very curious circumstances of this kind ; — one
case was that of a gentleman who had met with an injury of the head,
by which concussion had been produced — every endeavour to get a word
from him was ineffectual; yet, at one period, when the attendants were
all absent, he got out of bed, bolted the door, made water, and re-
turned to bed again, in the same manner as though he had been in per-
fect health : when the servant went back, he found the door fastened ;
all their knocking was unavailing ; they were obliged to break it open,
and then could not procure from him a single word. Indeed, I do not
believe the noise of an earthquake would have succeeded in rousing him
from his lethargy ; yet he could get out of bed, pass his urine, and adopt
his ordinary habit of delicacy, by bolting the door. I have caught a
man, when labouring under the effects of concussion, with his feet in a
chamber-pot, and by the action of his hands, it was evident that he
was trying to throw water over his legs ; upon the servant going into

L 2



112



ON INJURIES OF THE HEAD.



the room of the same individual some days after, he was found to be
attempting to shave himself, and having no lather, he substituted a pot
of spermaceti ointment, which he had brushed all over his face.

I suppose you have all heard of the extraordinary change which the
memory sometimes undergoes from the effects of concussion. The first
story of this kind that I ever heard was from Mr. Cline. A man was
taken to Guy’s, in a state of insensibility, in which condition he re-
mained for some time, but at length recovered; and when he did so, no
person in the hospital could understand his language; a milk-woman
happening to go into the ward one day, heard him, and discovered that
he was speaking Welch : he told her that he knew English well before
the accident, but after it all knowledge of that language was obliterated
from his mind. It had been recently acquired ; the impression was less
strong, and consequently the more easily effaced.

I witnessed a similar circumstance in the case of a German, who was
a sugar -baker in this town, and who had compression of the brain,
arising not from any injury by violence, but from pressure in conse-
quence of the formation of matter. This man could speak English ex-
tremely well before the compression ; but as the compression increased
from the accumulation of matter, he lost his English entirely, and I
could only communicate with him through the medium of an interpreter.
At last he lost the power of speaking, even in his native language, and
he died in consequence of the accumulation of matter. It is curious to
observe the gradual change which takes place in the intellectual facul-
ties, as alterations occur in the brain ; and the gradual diminution of
ideas which have been more recently acquired, until at length they be-
come totally obliterated. Old persons are observed to be fond of re-
lating anecdotes of their youth, forgetting incidents of more recent
occurrence ; and the change which takes place in the intellect from in-
juries of the brain is very similar to the effects of age. The patient
becomes, as it were, suddenly old, loses impressions of a recent date,
and is sensible only of those which he has received in his earlier years.
Such is the state of mind very frequently produced by compression of
the brain.

With respect to the state of the brain under concussion, when the
concussion is not extremely violent, there is merely a change in the cir-
culation of the brain.

A sudden shock will so far disturb the circulation of this organ, as to
produce diminution of the powers of the mind, as well as to impair the
functions of the body. I shall have occasion to mention to you a most
extraordinary case, in which the functions of the mind were suspended
from an interruption of circulation in the brain, for upwards of thirteen



ON INJURIES OF THE HEAD.



113



months ; the patient having, as it were, drunk of the cup of Lethe
during all that period. Any change of the circulation in the brain
alters, in some degree, the powers of mind and body ; but if the agita-
tion be very considerable, the powers of the mind will be for a time sus-
pended. Thus, when a person is said to be stunned, there is a sudden
alteration of the circulation in the brainy and a corresponding loss of
sensibility; but when the circulation is restored by the means which I
shall presently point out to you, the powers of the mind return with
those of the body. When the concussion is very violent, a lesion of the
brain takes place ; but when it is slight, no appearances can be discovered
on dissection, which indicate any alteration of structure. A person may
die from another injury, accompanied with concussion ; and on exami-
nation after death, not the least alteration may be found in the brain.
This is not the case, however, where the concussion is violent. I have
before me a great number of preparations, from the brains of patients
who have died of concussion, in most of which that organ was consider-
ably lacerated, and some extravasation of blood is observable within the
brain. (Several beautiful specimens of lacerated brain, accompanied
with extravasation of blood, were exhibited to the class.) These speci-
mens show the effects produced by severe concussion. I remember a
case of a gentleman, an intimate friend of the late Lord Nelson, who fell
from his horse at the corner of St. Thomas’s-street, in the Borough. He
was immediately taken to Guy’s Hospital, where he was found to have
all the symptoms of concussion, and he was treated in the usual manner.
On examination of the body after death (for he died eight days after the
accident), the brain was found to be lacerated in several places, and con-
siderable extravasation of blood had taken place. In general, therefore,
when the concussion is slight, there will be only an alteration of circu-
lation in the brain; but when it is severe, there will be laceration,
accompanied with extravasation of blood, and the symptoms will be
found to run into those of compression. The first case in which I ever
saw the brain lacerated from concussion, was one which occurred at the
other hospital, in the first year of my apprenticeship, when I was a
dresser to Mr. Chandler. As this was the first case of the kind I had
seen, I preserved a portion of the brain. The patient had lost the
power of speech from a blow on the head ; but there was no appearance
of any wound or injury to the skull. Mr. Chandler attributed the loss
of speech to concussion. On examination of the body after death, it
was found that the anterior lobe of the cerebrum was torn, the first effect
of which injury was the loss of the power of utterance, or rather a pa-
ralysis of the muscles, which deprived him of the power of speech, and
subsequently compression and inflammation, of which he died. When



114



ON INJURIES OF THE HEAD.



you are asked, then, as to the effects of concussion, as they may be col-
lected from the appearances on dissection, you will answer, that when
the concussion is slight, it is merely an agitation of the brain, by which
the circulation is altered ; but when it is severe, the brain itself suffers
laceration, which laceration is accompanied with extravasation of blood.
By the knowledge of these facts we are led, without difficulty, to the
principles of treatment.

Treatment of Concussion The great danger which we have to

guard against, in the treatment of concussion, is inflammation of the
brain. This principle must direct our practice ; and in order to pre-
vent inflammation, we must take away a very considerable quantity of
blood. By bleeding largely at first, we not only remove existing in-
flammation, but we prevent that which would otherwise occur. This
practice, however, may be carried to excess. There are some persons
who say you cannot bleed too much in these cases ; but such an asser-
tion only proves their want of understanding. You must regulate your
conduct by the symptoms ; observe whether there be any hardness in
your patient’s pulse, and whether he complains of pain in the head, if
he have still the power of complaining ; watch your patient with the
greatest possible anxiety ; visit him at least three times a-day, and if
you find any hardness of the pulse supervening, after the first copious
bleeding, take away a tea-cupful of blood ; but do not go on bleeding him
largely, for you would by this means reduce the strength of your pa-
tient too much, and prevent the reparative process of nature. It is ne-
cessary that there should be a slight degree of inflammation, for with-
out this, the reparative process cannot go on, and the patient cannot
recover; but it will be your duty to keep this inflammation within due
bounds. I shall mention a case in which fatal consequences ensued from
the error committed by the surgeon in bleeding his patient to such ex-
cess, that the slight degree of inflammation necessary to the process of
adhesion was removed, and the reparative process of nature consequently
prevented.

In these lectures, gentlemen, I feel it to be my duty to describe to you
surgery as it is — and not in the glowing colours in which it is painted
to you in books. You must be content to practice surgery as it is — not
as ft is sometimes fallaciously represented to you. I am most anxious
that you should omit nothing which may contribute to increase your
professional skill, and enable you to afford the greatest possible sum of
relief to the sufferings of your patients ; but they who blazon forth our
profession as one which is attended with undeviating success, are only
deceiving you. You must hear the untoward cases of your profession,
as well as those of which the issue is favourable, in order to form a cor-



ON INJURIES OF THE HEAD.



115



rect judgment in your minds of wliat your profession really is. It is for
these reasons, gentlemen, that I shall never hesitate, coute qui coule, to
detail to you, and perhaps to the public, those causes which have ter-
minated unfavourably. I have a duty to perforin, and I shall never
shrink from the discharge of it. It is by detailing to you the unfavour-
able as well as the favourable cases, that I can alone perform that duty ;
for it is by such a course alone that I can point out to you the rocks
which you are to avoid, as well as the havens in which you are to en-
deavour to anchor. The case to which I last alluded was one of con-
cussion, accompanied with slight laceration of the brain, which occurred
in the other hospital. The gentleman under whose care the patient was,
thought it right to bleed him, and that he could not bleed him too
largely. He accordingly bled, not only from day to day, but twice a
day. The consequence of this mode of treatment was, that the patient
became perfectly pale, was in a state of considerable dejection, not of the
mind, but of the powers of the body, and died without any symptoms
of inflammation, ten days after the injury. On examination of the
body, it was found that there was a slight laceration of the brain, with
some degree of extravasation of blood, but that not the slightest attempt
had been madfc by nature to heal the wound. You are aware that the
brain heals like any other organ, hy the process of adhesion; but in this
case, the quantity of blood taken from the patient was so large, that the
slight inflammation necessary to the adhesive process was removed, and
the process of restoration consequently prevented. Still it is often ne-
cessary to take away blood, after the first large bleeding ; but it must
be taken in small quantities, and you must watch the patient with the
greatest possible anxiety, for the symptoms can alone regulate your
practice. Sometimes it is necessary to take away large quantities of
blood. I was called to a gentleman who had fallen from his horse in
riding to London. I found him insensible on my arrival. Mr. Con-
stable, who attended him, had already bled him, but I judged it neces-
sary to bleed him again largely ; and I took blood in smaller quantities
from him day after day, watching the pulse with the greatest anxiety,
and bleeding him only so far as to reduce the hardness of the pulse
without diminishing too much the powers of his body. The whole
quantity of blood taken from this gentleman, by bleeding from the arm,
opening the temporal artery, and the application of leeches, as far as
this could be estimated, amounted to about two hundred and eight
ounces of blood. One hundred and eighty ounces were taken from the
arm ; yet such was the hardness of the pulse, that at the last bleeding
there was some degree of inflammation of the brain indicated.

Vou are to use bleeding as a means of preventing inflammation ; but



116



ON INJURIES OF THE HEAD.



you are not to resort to it as a matter of course, the moment you are
called to a patient under concussion. A man falls from his horse, and
the instant he is picked up from the ground, some surgeons think it
necessary to take the lancet from their pocket. This conduct is quite
irrational ; for supposing the pulse could scarcely be felt at the wrist
of the patient, and the surgeon were in such a case asked why he pro-
ceeded to bleed ; what would his answer be ? The probability is, that he
would have no answer at all ready ; or he would perhaps say, that he
bled him because the accident had brought a great quantity of blood to
the brain, as if the shaking of the head could have any effect in producing
a determination of blood to the brain. It is not with this view that we
bleed in concussion, but in order to prevent inflammation. I have seen
many a patient who would have died if a large quantity of blood had
been taken at the time of the accident. This was the case with the gen-
tleman who was attempting to shave himself, whose symptoms I de-
scribed to you this evening. When I first saw him, his pulse was
scarcely perceptible. I took a little blood from the arm, and he was
immediately seized with convulsions, like an epileptic fit, which I
thought would have proved fatal. I closed the wound, and I would
not upon any account have taken six ounces of blood from him at that
moment. Some time ago I saw a man, at the other hospital, who had
received a blow on the head. He was pale and dejected, and his pulse
could scarcely be felt. I said to the dresser, you must not bleed this
man at present : there is rather too little action than too much ; wait
till the pulse rises, and then bleed him. In the evening re-action took
place; the pulse rose, and the dresser then very properly bled him.
Inflammation was by this means prevented, and the man did well.
The principle upon which you should act, gentlemen, is never to do
any thing in your profession without a good reason, which, whatever
may be the result of the case, will leave your conscience clear. A sur-
geon who bleeds without being able to assign any other reason than that
his patient has received a blow, is not fit to practice his profession.

The next remedy I come to is emetics.

I must say that I have seen emetics of considerable use ; the vomiting
produced by them does good. I have always considered the efforts of
nature to relieve herself after injuries salutary ; and thus the vomiting
which is excited in cases of concussion, acts beneficially by relieving
the stomach of its contents, as the accident generally happens to persons
in a state of intoxication ; and also by propelling the blood to the brain,
and thus restoring the powers of life. But the vomiting excited by
nature restores the patient to his senses for a short time. He is some-
times relieved, but without continuing so long; he’looks about, and



ON INJURIES OF THE HEAD.



117



lapses into his former state of aberration of mind, from which he had
received merely a temporary relief. When emetics are exhibited as a
remedy in concussion, there is only one thing that I fear from their use ;
when there is any extravasation of blood in the brain, or any tendency to
apoplexy, then they should be employed with caution ; and it is on that
account that I wait for three or four hours after the accident before I
order them.

With respect to the exhibition of cathartics, the bowels should be
kept open by calomel purges, followed by the infusion of senna apd sul-
phate of magnesia. The calomel should be given about two hours
after the accident ; and it will be useful to give to the patient at the same
time a quantity of mild fluids to drink, as by this means a disposition
to purging is kept up, counter-irritation, is, as it were, produced, and
the blood is drawn from the brain to the intestinal canal. Submuriate of
mercury, with lemon juice squeezed in water, should be given. Perspi-
ration on the surface of the body is very desirable, and for this purpose
antimonials are employed. Thepulv. Ipec. Com. (Dover’s Powder) is
not generally used to produce moisture of the skin, on account of the
opium it contains, as it confounds the judgment, and prevents your see-
ing what are the effects of the opium, and what those of the disease ;
for opium produces the same disturbance to the brain as takes place in
concussion ; therefore it is not often employed. Counter-irritation is
of use, but not until other means have been resorted to ; the object of
blisters is to subdue the inflammation when other means have failed. I
have known a patient, with pain in the head, sickness at the stomach, loss
of strength, and throbbing of the carotids, who had been often relieved by
blood-letting, for about two hours only after it was done. A person
under such circumstances I have known benefited by the application
of a blister; on the principle not of increasing but subduing action,
from an excess of which the ill consequences are to be feared.

For the symptoms after concussion, the trephine used to be employed ;
but it now becomes a question- whether it ever ought to be resorted to
as a means of relief under those circumstances ? To this I say, if you
were to trephine, you ought to be trephined yourselves in turn. What
will trephining do ? Probably great harm, by disturbing the brain ;
and if not, no good can possibly result from it. Now for the proofs :
first, that it does no good. Gentlemen, I never lecture to you but from
the recollection of some case that has occurred to me. I was very inti-
mate with a Mr. T., of Yarmouth, where 1 used to spend a good deal of
time when a boy ; after my apprenticeship was finished, I went down
to this place, and I found Mr. T. labouring under the effects of con-
cussion ; his mind was not in the least affected ; he had received a blow



!



118 ON INJURIES OF THE HEAD.

on the forehead from a bludgeon, and he was afterwards frequently seized
with sickness at the stomach. I called on him : and when I went
into the room, I said, I come to ask you how you are: in approaching
me he was obliged to put his handkerchief to his mouth to prevent the
contents of his stomach going over me. In his walks he had frequent
vomitings: a relation who was at Yarmouth twelve months after this,
said to him, that he had better have the trephine applied, and the por-
tion of bone removed : to which he readily consented. After the ope-
ration his symptoms were not relieved ; he remained just the same ; or
1 should rather say that he was not relieved, for he did not continue long
in the same state ; he soon got worse and worse ; his bowels became
costive, the powers of the mind affected, and he died in consequence of
the operation, though he had lived two years after the injury, before it was
performed. Mr. B., now in Yarmouth, was living with him at the time,
and he could tell more of the particulars than myself ; but this I know,
that he was not benefited by the operation, but injured by it. But for
a more direct proof that it is dangerous : Dr. Farre told me that he
knew a person who was subject to epileptic fits after concussion of the
brain, and that he was extremely anxious to be trephined. The opera-
tion of trephining was performed, and he died soon afterwards. Do not
think, gentlemen, that I mention this as an uncommon case ; but this
used to be the plan adopted with almost all the patients admitted into
these hospitals during my apprenticeship ; they were all submitted to
the operation ; inflammation of the membranes of the brain supervened,
and nearly all died ; recovery being very rare. But do our patients now
die from the effects of concussion ? No ; by bleeding and depletion we
rarely lose a patient; perhaps we have fallen into the contrary extreme.
After the expiration of my apprenticeship at these hospitals, I went
over to Paris to seethe practice of Desault, at the Hfltel-Dieu ; and there
I found that never, under any circumstances whatever, did he trephine ;
and that he was more successful than those who were constantly doing it
here. Trephining in concussion is now so completely abandoned, that
in the last four years I do not know that I have performed it once :
whilst, thirty -five years ago, I should have performed it five or six times
a-year. But I believe that I have omitted one circumstance ; and that
is, to tell you to pay strict attention to the mind ; excessive anxiety must
be prevented ; for if you suffer the mind to be disturbed, you do little or
nothing towards the recovery. I was very much struck, about twelve
months ago, with an instance of this : a boy was brought to me from
the north of England, who had lost a portion of the skull just above the
eye-brow ; and I was asked (for it was for this circumstance that I was
consulted) what protection should be given to the denuded brain ? On



ON COMPRESSION OF THE BRAIN.



119



examining the brain, I distinctly perceived the pulsation was regular
and slow ; but at this time he was agitated by some means or other ;
directly, the blood was sent with increased force to the brain the pulsa-
tion became more violent ; therefore, if you omit to keep the mind
free from agitation, your other means will be unavailing.

Lastly, the treatment of children. As you cannot always bleed them
from the arm, you must give the submuriat hydrargyri (calomel) with
mild drink, so as to purge them ; leeches must be applied to the tem-
ples ; you must open the jugular vein. For the symptoms after con-
cussion, as pain in the head, or sickness at the stomach, you must make
an incision through the scalp ; put issues ill ; wash the head with spirits
of wine and water, for this is better than any thing else I know ; and
use the shower-bath two or three times. These are the best means for
giving power to the nervous system, and bringing the action of the
brain into a healthy state.



LECTURE XVII.

ON COMPRESSION OF THE BRAIN.

We have to consider the causes which give rise to it, its symptoms, and
the treatment which it requires.

When a person is labouring under compression of the brain, it is
known by the breathing being stertorous, the pulse slow, and the pupils
dilated ; to which may be added the symptoms of concussion ; when
you then find a patient with the apoplectic stertor, slow pulse, dilated
pupils, it will generally happen that the brain is compressed. The
causes which produce compression are three: 1. Extravasation of

blood ; 2. Fracture with depression ; 3. Formation of matter within
the skull ; these are the three causes which give rise to compression : we
shall first consider compression when produced by extravasation. Now,
gentlemen, when the brain is compressed by extravasated blood, the
symptoms do not directly occur ; the person at the time of the injury is
often stunned ; recovers himself, and a short time after falls into a
comatose state, and then the apoplectic stertor begins. I will relate to
you a case to illustrate this : a child was playing on a table, from which
it fell on a stone floor, and received a severe blow on the head, which
caused a compression of the brain ; the child appeared to recover at
four in the afternoon, the time at which the accident occurred being
one ; pain still continued in the head, the child cried considerably ; it
went to bed about two hours before its usual time; during the night, the
servant was awoke by the apoplectic stertor of the child, which prevented



120



ON COMPRESSION OF THE BRAIN.



her from sleeping ; when she moved it, the child was not roused ; she
discovered that it was ill, alarmed the family, and at eight in the morn-
ing it died : it was found after death, that a considerable quantity of
blood was extravasated in the brain. The son of a most respectable mer-
chant of the city was driving to his country-house at a short distance
from town, in a one-horse chaise, when he was thrown out, and pitched
with his head to the ground; he was stunned by the fall; he recovered
a little, but looked very pale; he said that he was much hurt; a friend
who was with him drove him home; in the evening he felt very heavy,
laying the head on his hand; symptoms of compression of the brain
came on; ten p. m., the family was alarmed; medical assistance called,
but at two the following morning he died, all efforts to save him being
unavailing.

Extravasation with concussion renders the case of a different nature;
then the symptoms of concussion, such as I described to you on a
former evening, come on first, and the apoplectic stertors and other
symptoms of compression succeed. Now for a case: A gentleman

was at a party with some friends. He drank freely of wine, and became
inebriated. His home was some distance from the place at which he
was spending the evening ; and his friends seeing that he would be
exposed to great risk, wished him to stop, but he could not be prevailed
on. He mounted his horse; and on the way was thrown off. He re-
turned home; fell into a comatose state; symptoms of coucussion first
came on, loss of voluntary motion, at first no appearance of extra-
vasation of blood was present; two, the following morning, apoplectic
stertor came on, and at eleven he died. In this case, symptoms of
concussion came on first, and those of compression afterwards. Blood
was found extravasated in the brain, as might be expected. It is found,
gentlemen, that the extravasated blood, producing compression of the
brain, is generally situated in three different parts : — First, between the
dura mater and pia mater. Second, between the pia mater and brain ;
and, lastly, within the substance of the brain itself. In this case
(Sir Astley pointing to a specimen on the table before him) there was
a considerable quantity (three ounces) the largest I ever saw effused
beneath the dura mater. In this also (pointing to another) there was a
large quantity extravasated opposite to the anterior inferior angle of the
parietal bone and meatus auditorius extemus; and the dura mater itself
was torn. Second, between the pia mater and brain : this is of more com-
mon occurrence ; and in this case a large portion of the brain will often be
found covered over with blood, not that the quantity of blood extravasated
is considerable, but a little is diffused over a large space. This portion of
brain before me was taken from a man who fell, I believe,’ from the



ON FRACTURES OF THE SKULL.



121



yard-arm of a ship, and who was carried to the other hospital (Guy’s), he
died four hours after his admission ; and on examination, after death,
the vessels going from the pia mater to the brain were completely tom
through. Third, within the substance of the brain itself; this (alluding
to a specimen on the table) was taken from a person in the city, who
had extravasation within the brain, from an accident ; after the injury
he considerably recovered, though pain still continued in the head ; in
three months afterwards he died, and on examination there was found
in the anterior lobe of the cerebrum a coagulum of blood, no portion of
which had been absorbed, as the surfaces close to the brain were quite
smooth. These are the three situations in which extravasated blood is
principally formed. I do not find any difference of symptoms produced
by the different situations of the blood ; the compression is produced
by the pressure of the blood, and the quantity of blood effused will de-
pend on the size of the vessel of the dura mater that is divided : what-
ever is the situation then of the blood, the symptoms of compression are
the same : if there should be any blood resting on the origin of a nerve,
there will be partial paralysis of the part which that nerve supplies. In
the treatment of these cases there is little to be done. If extravasation of
blood occurs with fracture, trephining may be of use. You should de-
plete freely, for the purpose of preventing inflammation : irritation is
to be lessened, the bowels are to be opened, and the patient kept very
quiet. If there is a bruise near the fracture, indicating the spot where
the effused blood is, you may trephine, that is, before symptoms of
excitement come on : when they take place, you must deplete only, and
not dream of performing the operation ; to do it under such circum-
stances would be highly absurd, and the height of madness.

ON FRACTURES OF THE SKULL.

Fractures of the skull are not of themselves dangerous, nor are they
injurious to the brain ; therefore these fractures do not call for any
alarm, if care be taken to prevent the inflammation ; the danger in these
cases i3 to be apprehended from disturbance in some distant part, irri-
tation of the system, or extravasation ; it is not then, I repeat, from the
fracture itself that the danger is to be apprehended, but from compres-
sion of the brain, extravasation of blood, or irritation in some distant
part ; therefore, when called to a case of fracture of the skull, you do
not operate, but consider the symptoms that are present, endeavour to
ascertain from what they arise, and then regulate your treatment accord-
ingly ? if the symptoms are those of concussion, the treatment must be
directed to it ; if those of extravasation of blood, and there is not much
excitement, it will be necessary to remove a portion of bone ; but if

M



122



Ox\ FRACTURES OF THE SKULL.



there be fracture only, without any of the symptoms above-mentioned,
there will be no occasion to operate.

When a fracture occurs at the base of the skull, it is much more dan-
gerous than at any other part, because extravasation is much more
likely to take place, or if not, inflammation of the brain, from the vio-
lence of the injury received, very often supervenes. The mode in which
these fractures are produced, is by falling from a great height on the
summit of the head : when all the weight of the body rests on the fora-
men magnum, and cuneiform process of the os occipitis, great injury is
in this way done ; as in very many cases a transverse fracture through
the foramen magnum, cuneiform process, and part of the temporal bone
is the consequence ; a discharge of blood into each meatus auditorius
takes place, and where there is no other mischief, deafness often remains
for life. A curious fracture within the orbit sometimes occurs, as
in the case from which this specimen (pointing to one on the table)
was taken, when destruction of life was the consequence of the injury
received. I will give you the history of the case: — A child was play-
ing with a scissors, w-hen the point of it entered the upper part of the
orbit, between the ball of the eye and the superior eye-lid ; the scissors
was with difficulty extracted ; the child’s eye did not become inflamed ;
after the accident the child walked from W alworth, to Mr. W., of
Hatton Garden, who attended it; on the 10th day from the time of the
mischief, symptoms of compression of the brain came on, rigors, inflam-
mation of the brain supervened, and the child died ; on examining the
body after death, it was found that the scissors had penetrated through
the orbitar process of the os frontis, and lacerated the dura mater ; a con-
siderable quantity of extravasated blood was found, and the anterior lobe
of the cerebrum was punctured by the point of the scissors, from which
it had received the injury.

It now and then happens that a blow received upon the summit of the
head will produce a circular fracture of the entire cranium, commencing
at the top of the head, passing down on each side through the temporal
bone, and meeting at the basis. — Mr. Chandler, late surgeon of the hos-
pital, had a case of this description ; there did not appear to be any ex-
travasation or concussion ; great irritation and violent inflammation suc-
ceeded, which destroyed the patient; and after death, it was discovered
that there existed a complete circular fracture of the skull, and that the
anterior portion could be freely separated from the posterior. I believe
these cases always terminate fatally.

•There is a curious fracture of the skull which occasionally takes place
over the frontal sinuses. When the fracture is simple, if the nose be
blown, the air escapes through the opening in the bone, and getting into



ON FRACTURES OF THE SKULL.



123



the cellular membrane under the skin, renders the forehead emphyse-
matous. If, on the other hand, the fracture is compound, upon blowing
the nose, the air rushes through the wound ; so that, in either case, the
nature of the accident may be easily ascertained.

Fractures of the skull, if unaccompanied with concussion or compres-
sion, as readily unite as fractures of the bones in any part of the
body. Here is a curious case (exhibiting a skull) where a circular, or
rather oblong, piece of bone was, as you may perceive, completely sepa-
rated from this part of the os parietale by the cut of a sabre ; and yet,
from what you here see, it is evident that it became re-united. How.
ever, I will send it round, that you may have an opportunity of ex-
amining it yourselves. Fractures of the cranium, therefore, easily
unite. Where, however, large holes are made through the skull, the
apertures do not again become filled by ossific matter, but by a tendi-
nous structure formed from the bone and dura mater. The holes made
in trephining are supplied in this manner, and not by bone. Also, when
in fractures of the skull, where the bones are separated to any distance,
the interspace will not become filled by bony matter, but remain open as
you here see it (showing a skull which had been fractured, and the
broken part widely separated.)

Treatment of Fractures of the Skull . — When there is simple frac-
ture, unaccompanied with symptoms of injured brain, you must not
trephine, neither in compound fracture ; but you must, by the applica-
tion of adhesive plaster, endeavour to heal the wound in the scalp as
quickly as possible. Let your constitutional treatment be that of de-
pletion, by means of blood-letting and purgatives. This plan often
removes symptoms of concussion, and even extravasation, which accom-
pany these fractures ; and often a few hours will show you that the ap-
plication of the trephine, which you at first might have thought indis-
pensable, is wholly unnecessary. It is wrong, therefore, to be too much
in a hurry in these accidents ; for irreparable mischief might arise from
your converting a fracture, which was simple, into one that is com-
pound. Wait, then, gentlemen, for a while, before you operate in such
cases, for the purpose of seeing what effects may be produced by bleed-
ing and purgatives. It not unfrequently happens in these hospitals,
upon persons being brought in who have received injuries of the head,
that the dresser in attendance will bleed them immediately after their
admission, and at the same time send off for the surgeon ; before whose
arrival, however, the good effects of loss of blood are apparent, and the
symptoms of concussion, and even of extravasation, have often disap-
peared. This shows how necessary it is that you should not be too
precipitate. If you act prudently, therefore, in these accidents, you will

M 2






124



ON FRACTURES OF THE SKULL.



try bleeding and purgatives before you operate ; and whether you do or
not, the depletion will prove of the greatest possible advantage in pre-
venting inflammation, and from which, if not kept within bounds,
arises the principal danger.

The next subject to which I shall direct your attention is

FRACTURE OF THE SKULL WITH DEPRESSION.

I will tell you what you ought to do in such cases, and then leave
you to act for yourselves. In order to ascertain whether the symptoms
arising from depression would come on immediately after the accident,
I tried the following experiment : — A gentleman having brought me a
large dog, I applied the trephine to his cranium, and took out a portion
of the bone. I then, with the handle of a knife, separated the dura
mater from the bone ; for I found that I could make no impression on
the brain until I had done so, and then pressed upon it with my finger.
At first the animal did not seem to feel it ; but upon pressing more
deeply, it produced pain and irritation, and he endeavoured to avoid us.
Upon still increasing the pressure, he became comatose, and fell. I
kept him in that state for five or six minutes, when, upon removing my
finger, he got up, turned round two or three times from giddiness, and
walked away, apparently little worse for the operation. A gentleman,
who felt the animal’s pulse during the continuance of the experiment,
stated, that it became slower as the pressure became increased. In man
it is the same— slow and labouring.

After blows have been received on the head, it often happens that
upon making an examination of the scalp, there appears to be depres-
sion of bone to a great extent, when, in reality, there is none. Let me
put you on your guard here. A person receives a blow on the scalp :
the parts immediately surrounding the spot where the blow was received
will rise, from the extravasation of blood, two or three lines higher than
the part itself; for there the cellular membrane having been condensed
by the injury, will likewise tend to increase the deception : thus the
surrounding parts are considerably higher than the middle ; and the
external character of the contusion is certainly calculated to deceive
those who are unacquainted with the nature of these accidents. I have
several times seen these affections ; but the first case which I recollect
was that of a child brought into Guy’s, who had received a severe blow
on the head from a brickbat, which had been thrown at it by a man.
All present were prepared for the operation, fully expecting that I should
apply the trephine ; for they felt convinced that there was considerable
depression of bone ; and when I stated I should not operate, they ex-
claimed, “ Good God ! I wonder what can be his reason.” This child,






125



ON FRACTURES OF THE SKULL.

after having been freely bled and purged, in two or three days quite
recovered.

I have often been sent for by my dressers to these cases, and have been
requested to bring my instruments with me ; but upon examination
have found that there was no depression of bone, and that the uneven
appearance of the scalp was produced by the causes before mentioned.

It also very often happens in fractures of the cranium that consider-
able depression of bone will take place from the external table of the
skull being driven into the diploe, and without producing the slightest
injury to the internal table ; do not, therefore, be precipitate in your
diagnosis, nor hastily determine upon performing an operation, which
you might afterwards have reason to repent : these fractures, however,
can only occur in those of a middle age, for in the very young and in
very old age, the skull is thin and without diploe. I believe in the
course of my practice, that I have frequently met with this accident,
and we have many preparations in the museum which clearly demon-
strate their true character ; but the three now before me (pointing to
three skulls) are, I think, quite sufficient to satisfy your minds as to the
nature of this accident ; here you see the external table has been driven
in, and yet no vestige of fracture in the internal ; here is another speci-
men, with greater depression ; and the third still more than either, yet
the internal plate is sound. I am not acquainted with the histories of
these specimens, but it is evident that the persons recovered by the re-
union that has occurred between the parts which were broken.

Suppose you are called to a patient who has had a severe blow on the
head, and that, on examining the skull, you find a portion of bone con-
siderably depressed. You may still find this man capable of giving a
history of the accident, and that his mind is not at all affected. On
the other hand, you may be called to a person who has a fracture of the
skull with depression, and who has lost the powers of mind. In such
a case, if the fracture is simple, and there is no wound in the scalp,
and no symptom of injury to the brain, it would be the worst practice
in the world to make an incision into the part, and perform the opera-
tion of trephining ; for, by making such an incision, you add greatly to
the danger of the patient, as you make what was before a simple, a com-
pound fracture, and consequently greatly increase the danger of inflam-
mation. Inflammation rarely follows fracture with depression, where
the fracture is simple, but very often follows a compound fracture, which
is produced by making an incision in the scalp. Never make an inci-
sion, therefore, when you can avoid it, or merely because there is frac-
ture with depression, if there be no symptom of injury to the brain.
Even if there be symptoms of injury to the brain, and the fracture be



126



ON FRACTURES OF THE SKULL.



simple, ilo not immediately trepan. Take away blood, and purge your
patient freely, and see how far the symptoms may be the result of con-
cussion of the brain, and not of depression. If the symptoms do not
yield to depletion, then, and not till then, perform the operation of tre-
phining. I was called to a lady who had fallen against a projection of
a wall in walking across her parlour. The os frontis was driven in, but
there was no symptoms of compression of the brain. I bled her, and
guarded cautiously against inflammation, but there was no necessity for
elevating a portion of the bone. This lady never had any symptoms of
injury to the brain, and she recovered by depletion alone.

The old practice used to be, the moment an injury to the brain was
suspected, and the least depression of the bone appeared, to make an in-
cision into the scalp. I have heard of a dresser in these hospitals, who,
having had no accident during his week, said, “ I will make a cut in
the head of one of my patients with fracture, for he may perhaps have
depression, and I shall in this way have something to do before my
week is up.” This dresser ought to have a cut made in his own head ;
he should have been cut for the simples. ( A laugh.) This was put-
ting his patient to considerable hazard ; for the simple fracture would,
by the incision, be rendered a compound fracture. In simple fracture,
then, when it is attended with symptoms of injury to the brain, deplete
before you trephine ; and when it is unattended with such symptoms,
though there may be depression, deplete merely, and never divide the
scalp.

If the fracture be compound, the treatment must be very different,
because a compound fracture is followed very generally by inflammation
of the brain, and it will be of no use to trephine, when inflammation is
once formed. It might be thought that it would be time enough to per-
form this operation when inflammation had appeared ; but this is not
the case, for if inflammation comes on, the patient will die whether you
trephine or not, and you will be so far from arresting its fatal progress
by trephining, that the operation will add to the danger of the inflam-
mation. When inflammation of the dura mater and membranes of the
brain has been excited by the depression of the bone, you cannot retard
the progress to death by performing the operation. These principles
may be illustrated by many cases. During the first year of my appren-
ticeship in these hospitals, I saw two instances : one, in a patient of
Mr. Cline’s, and another in a patient of Mr. Birch’s. Mr. Cline’s pa-
tient was a man who came from Walworth, with compound fracture,
from a blow on the head. A portion of bone had been forced into the
cavity in the skull. Mr. Cline advised him to submit to the operation
of trephining. The man said, “ You may do what you like ; I am no



ON FRACTURES OF THE SKULL.



127



judge, but you are, so do what you please with me.” Accordingly, he
walked into the operating theatre to be trephined ; the portion of bone
was removed ; he walked back again to bed, and never had a bad sym-
tom. A short time after, a patient under Mr. Birch, with fracture and
depression, was told that he was in similar danger, and advised to un-
dergo the same operation. He was, however, self-willed, and obsti-
nately refused to submit to it. Eleven days after the accident, he was
seized with pain in the head, and symptoms of inflammation in the
brain, and when he became insensible, the operation of trephining was
performed : but it did not arrest the symptoms, and he died of the in-
flammation. In the other hospital two boys were admitted under very
similar circumstances. The os frontis had, in one case, been broken by
a kick from a horse, and in the other by a fall on the forehead. In the
former case the portion of bone was raised, and the boy did well ;
but the mother of the other boy interfered to prevent the operation of
trephining ; and though it was performed after symptoms of inflam-
mation had appeared, he died. It is quite true that it often happens
that fracture with depression is frequently not followed by inflammation,
even when the fracture is compound ; but we cannot be certain of this,
and if it does ensue, we cannot save the patient by trephining at a late
period. The rule, therefore, which I always follow, is this : — When I
am called to a fracture, with depression, which is exposed to view, I
generally use an elevator, and very rarely the trephine. I put this in-
strument under the bone, raise it up, and if it has been comminuted,
remove the small portions of bone. If, however, one bone is wedged
within the other, I apply the trephine for raising the depressed portion
of bone. The elevation of the bone is never followed by any mischief ;
but if you do not raise it, and inflammation follows, it will be too late
to attempt to save the life of the patient.

I shall conclude, gentlemen, by mentioning two other circumstances ;
but they are two circumstances to which, if there be any thing valuable
in the lecture, I wish most particularly to call your attention.

The first is this ; it sometimes happens, in fracture of the skull at-
tended with depression, that a small spicular portion of bone will project
into the brain, so as to produce and support epileptic symptoms. A
negro, who was a patient of Mr. Birch, had fracture from a blow on the
head, and a portion of bone was depressed. Shortly after, he was seized
with epileptic fits, which continued for many years. When he was ad-
mitted into the hospital, it was found that there was still a portion of
the depressed bone remaining, and the trephine was applied to it. When
the circular piece of bone was completely sawed round by the trephine,
so that it could be moved from side to side, Mr. Birch found a difficulty



128



ON FRACTURES OF THE SKULL.



in raising it ; he put the elevator under it, but still it adhered to some-
thing within. At last he took a pair of forceps, and by using more force,
he extracted a little spur or thorn, which had proceeded from the inner
side ot the skull through the dura mater into the substance of the brain,
and was the cause of the epileptic fits. After its removal, he had but one
more fit, and completely recovered.

The other circumstance which I shall mention is one, which, whether
we regard it in a physiological or surgical point of view, is perhaps, one
of the most extraordinary that ever occurred ; and, as connected with
surgery and physiology, I am surprised it has not made a greater im-
pression on the public mind than it appears to have done. A man was
pressed on board one of his Majesty’s ships, early in the late revolu-
tionary war. While on board this vessel in the Mediterranean he re-
ceived a fall from the yard-arm, and when he was picked up, he was
found to be insensible. The vessel soon after making Gibraltar, he was
deposited in an hospital in that place, where he remained for some
months, still insensible : and some time after he was brought from
Gibraltar, on board the Dolphin frigate, to a depot for sailors at Dept-
ford. While he was at Deptford, the surgeon under whose care he was,
was visited by Mr. Davy, who was then an apprentice at this hospital :
the surgeon said to Mr. Davy, “ I have a case which I think you
would like to see. It is a man who has been insensible for many months ;
he lies on his back with very few signs of life ; he breathes, indeed, has
a pulse, and some motion in his fingers ; but in all other respects he is
apparently deprived of all powers of mind, volition, or sensation.” Mr.
Davy went to see the case, and, on examining the patient, found that
there was a slight depression on one part of the head. Being informed
of the accident which had occasioned this depression, he recommended
the man to be sent to St. Thomas’s Hospital. He was placed under the
care of Mr. Cline ; and when he was first admitted into this hospital, I
saw him lying on his back, breathing without any great difficulty ; his
pulse regular, his arms extended, and his fingers moving to and fro to
the motion of his heart; so that you could count his pulse by this mo-
tion of his fingers. If he wanted food, he had the power of moving his
lips and tongue; and this action of his mouth was the signal to his
attendants for supplying this want.

Mr. Cline, on examining his head, found an obvious depression;
and thirteen months and a few days after the accident, he was carried
into the operating theatre, and there trephined. The depressed portion
of bone was elevated from the skull. While he was lying on the table,
the motion of his fingers went on during the operation, but no sooner
was the portion of bone raised than it ceased. The operation was per-



ON WOUNDS OF THE BRAIN.



129



formed at one o’clock in the afternoon ; and at four o’clock, as I was
walking through the wards, I went up to the man’s bed-side, and was
surprised to see him sitting up in his bed. He had raised himself on
his pillow. I asked him if he felt any pain, and he immediately put
his hand to his head. This showed that volition and sensation were
returning. In four days from that time the man was able to get out of
bed, and began to converse ; and in a few days more he was able to tell
us where he came from. He recollected the circumstance of his having
been pressed, and carried down to Plymouth or Falmouth ; but from
that moment up to the time when the operation was performed (that is,
for a period of thirteen months and some days) his mind remained in
a state of perfect oblivion. He had drunk, as it were, the cup of
Lethe ; he had suffered a complete death, as far as regarded his mental
and almost all his bodily powers ; but by removing a small portion of
the bone with the saw, he was at once restored to all the functions of
his mind, and almost all the powers of his body.

It appears, therefore, that in cases of depression we should not be
prevented from trephining, however distant the period may be at which
the accident occurred ; and the patient may, after any interval, be re-
stored to the powers of body and mind.



LECTURE XVIII.

ON WOUNDS OF THE BRAIN.

Wounds of the brain will often happen, without producing any inter-
ruption to the operations of either body or mind. But should the wound
be accompanied by either compression or concussion, then the par-
ticular symptoms which characterize those injuries will be present. If,
however, the wound be a simple incision or laceration, it will often prove
quite harmless. Indeed, it frequently occurs that considerable portions
of the brain are lost, and yet the mental and bodily functions continue
unimpaired. Epileptic fits and hemiplegia certainly sometimes follow
as effects of such injuries ; but on the other hand, brain to a great ex-
tent has been lost without having been succeeded by disturbance of
either the mental or bodily functions ; numerous cases of this descrip-
tion are upon record; several have fallen under my own observation.
A case similar to the following likewise came under the notice of a sur-
geon at Brighton. A dresser of the late Mr. Chandler once came to
me when I was in the other hospital, and said “ Look here, Sir,” at
the same time showing me a portion of brain, with a piece of the pia
mater attached to it. I went to see this man, and found the representa-



130



ON WOUNDS OF THE BRAIN.



tion of the dresser correct ; there was a large transverse opening in the
os fronds, through which a considerable quantity of brain had been
lost. His mind was not at all affected ; neither were the bodily powers
in the least disturbed; no bad symptoms of any kind followed the
injury ; the wound healed most favourably, and he was soon discharged.
About a year afterwards, while 1 was at the house of a lady in the city,
whom I was attending, a man walked into the room, and said to me,
“ How do you do?” Not recollecting him, I looked at him with some
sort of surprise, as you may suppose, when he informed me that he was
the man whom I had seen about a year before in St. Thomas’s Hospi-
tal, with a wound in the head, and through which he had lost some of
his brain. I replied that I could readily believe him. He stated that
he had been quite well ever since — he had what he called an opening
where he received the wound ; was not subject to fits ; and to show
you that his mind (notwithstanding his familiar “ how do you do ? ”)
had not sustained any damage from the accident, he was, at the time I
saw him, conductor of an extensive business at the house where he was
then living.

It occasionally happens, when a portion of brain has been lost, that
a piece of the cranium will, by being driven in, occupy its place ; and
if, in these cases, no symptoms of compression manifest themselves,
you must not elevate the depressed bone : for were you to do so, you
would, in all probability, give rise to extravasation, or increase the
hazard of inflammation. The late Mr. Chandler had a patient in this
hospital, who, on receiving a blow from a boat-hook upon the parietal
bone, had a portion of that bone driven into the brain, and at the same
time a quantity of the brain was lost : at first there was hemiplegia ;
this effect, however, soon disappeared. The depressed bone was per-
mitted to remain, and the individual perfectly recovered. Such cases
are not uncommon, and I could relate a number of them to you.

The danger attending injuries of the brain arises principally from
two causes : viz. inflammation, and the formation of fungus. 1st. In-
flammation, and 2nd, Fungus ; but I am happy to tell you, that both
of these may be conquered by scientific and prompt treatment. When
the brain receives a wound, you must commence your curative exertions
by abstracting as large a quantity of blood from the system as the con-
stitution of your patient will bear ; not, however, to such an extent as
to prevent the restorative operations of nature. Do not lower the sys-
tem to such a degree as to prevent inflammation altogether, as was done
by the dresser in the other hospital, whose partiality for bleeding I men-
tioned to you a few evenings since. Though you succeed in keeping
down inflammation, fungus will spring up ; and here (exhibiting a pre-



ON WOUNDS OF THE BRAIN.



131



paration) you have an opportunity of seeing an example of the disease
to which I allude. Sometimes wounds of the brain extends even to the
ventricles, and here (showing another preparation) you observe that
one of the lateral ventricles was laid open.

Now, gentlemen, some days after the brain has been wounded, the
divided parts begin to unite by means of the adhesive inflammation ; if
this process cannot effect a cure, granulations form, which at length
project through the opening in the skull, and give rise to the fungus
before mentioned. Upon proper treatment the safety of your patient
depends. If you do not repress the growth of the fungus, there will be
violent constitutional irritation, and the life of the person in jeopardy ;
but, on the contrary, if you attend to the condition of the wound, and
prevent the fungus from rising, there will be, comparatively speaking,
but little danger.

Well, gentlemen, the treatment is as follows : — You are to apply to
the fungus a piece of lint, wetted with liquor calcis, and over this, strap-
ping of adhesive plaster ; when you examine the part on the following
day, you will find the fungus considerably diminished ; you are then to
use a thicker piece of lint, and the strapping as before ; pursuing this
plan, you at length get the fungus to the level of the scalp ; but this is
not sufficiently low for your purpose, therefore you must still thicken the
lint until you have succeeded in getting it even with the edges of the dura
mater, in which position it must be cautiously preserved ; when, at last
the dura mater heals over it, and your object is accomplished. We
witness many examples of such cases in these hospitals. Formerly it
was the practice in the treatment of these diseases to remove the bone
contiguous to the fungus: immense quantities of bone in this manner
were taken away, thereby affording every facility to the growth of the
fungus, and which, of course, rapidly increased, until the patient was
destroyed. By such treatment as this, no person could possibly recover ;
the method was a most injurious and stupid one: therefore let me
caution you against adopting it. The plan of treatment which I have
just recommended to you, is unquestionably, the best: viz. that of re-
pressing the growth of the fungus until the dura mater heals over it.

INFLAMMATION FOLLOWING WOUNDS OF THE BItAIN.

I shall now speak more particularly of the inflammation which follows
wounds of the brain, wherein their chief danger consists ; which danger
is much increased, if the dura mater be the part attacked. Upon the
first approach of inflammation, the person complains of a great pain in
the head ; very quickly falls into a comatose state ; and when roused
from this condition, the pain is excessive ; the scalp, round the external



132



ON WOUNDS OF THE BRAIN



wound, becomes csdematous, for if you press upon it, the impression of
the finger is retained ; the edges of the wound have a shining glossy
appearance, and from the wound itself is discharged a fluid, composed
of blood and serum; sometimes the parts about the wound have a
sloughy appearance ; the countenance is very much flushed, and the
carotid arteries beat with very great force ; so much so, that if his shirt-
collar be open, you can see the pulsation of the carotids, at some distance
from the bed ; this circumstance, of itself, would be quite sufficient to
convince you that there was a great determination of blood to the brain.
The next thing which you observe is, that the patient is seized with
rigors, and these follow in very quick succession ; hemiplegia likewise
often attends, and is generally situated on that side of the body opposite
to the wound ; the patient remains in a comatose state, but when roused,
will give you (until towards the very last) rational answers to such ques-
tions as may be put to him. These, then, are the ordinary symptoms
of inflammation of the brain, arising from wounds of that organ.

If the inflammation should terminate in suppuration, I have already
shown you in a former lecture where the matter would be situated, viz.
between the dura mater and skull (this rarely happens), pia mater and
tunica araclmoides, pia mater and surface of the brain, and, lastly, in the
substance of the brain itself. When pus is situated between the dura
mater and skull, trephining for its removal would be attended with com-
plete success ; but the chances of finding it there are against you, as it is
generally situated between the pia mater and surface of the brain, for
which an operation would prove worse than useless. Another situation
in the head where matter has been found is, in the longitudinal sinus of
the dura mater. This woman (holding up a preparation), seventeen
months before she died, fell down stairs, and her head went in violent
contact against a chest, by which she became stunned : for some time
after the fall, matter was discharged from one of her ears; this at length
ceased, and, to all appearance, she was entirely well. The pain, how-
ever, again returned with evident symptoms of compression; and six-
teen months after the accident she was admitted into this hospital.
After some remedies had been fruitlessly tried, and she had been here
for a short time, it was thought advisable to try the trephine ; the ope-
ration was unsuccessful, and four days afterwards she died. Upon
examination, it was found that there was a small quantity of pus em-
bedded in the longitudinal sinus, as you here see it (exhibiting the pre-
paration). This is the only example of the kind which I have witnessed.

The next part in which matter is situated is between the tunica
araclmoides and pia mater, or between the pia mater and brain itself.
This last is of most common occurrence, and in this case the matter is



FOLLOWED BY INFLAMMATION.



133



diffused over the hemispheres of the brain, in the same manner, as I
mentioned to you the other evening, that blood is when extravasated on
that organ. When the matter is between the pia mater and brain, it
will be of no use to operate, as very little will be discharged, there
being no communication between one part and another ; for the matter
is contained within distinct cells, between the vessels which come from
the pia mater to the brain. The next situation in which matter is foun d
is in the substance of the brain itself. Here are specimens (pointing to
some on the table), in one of which matter was lodged in the anterior
lobe of the cerebrum, the other in the cerebellum ; in fact, it is lodged
in various parts, and the only circumstance very curious in this com-
plaint is, that you would not suppose, from the symptoms, that matter
was forming ; they are those of compression rather than irritation. If
the membranes of the brain be attacked with violent inflammation,
symptoms of irritation will be present ; but if the brain itself, they
will be those of compression ; and the circumstance which surprises a
person who examines the brain of an individual in which matter has
been formed is, that so little constitutional irritation existed during its
formation : it is inflammation of the membranes, and not of the brain
itself, in which great irritation is present. Here is a curious specimen
(pointing to one before him), taken from a child that I had under my
care, and on whom I performed the operation of trephining ; I will give
you the history of the case : A young child was playing in a yard
where there were some fowls, when it received a wound on the head
from the beak of a cock. The mother hearing the child shriek, ran to
the spot, and found that there was a small wound of the scalp, and
thinking that there was no injury to the brain, she bound it up ; but a
week afterwards pain in the head came on, together with great consti-
tutional irritation, and the child was brought to me. On examining
the head, I found that a circular incision had been made in the bone,
and that matter issued through the opening. I said to the mother, If the
child is not better by to-morrow, bring it to me again, and I will allow
a more free opening for the matter to discharge itself. The next day
the child was brought to my house, and I performed the operation of
trephining, when I found there was an opening in the dura mater and
pia roater, corresponding to that of the bone; the symptoms of irri-
tation were relieved by the operation, those of compression, however,
came on, and in three days from the time it was performed, the child
died. On examining the part after death, I found that there was a cir-
cular incision in the dura mater, the edges of which were hardened and
thickened, as you see here (pointing to the very part), a similar state of
the pia mater and brain, in size corresponding to the external opening,



134



ON WOUNDS OF THE BRAIN,



and an abscess between the pia mater and brain. At that time I had
no idea that a wound of the description I have just mentioned could be
produced by a bird of this size ; but, since that period, I have seen an
instance of a similar kind : a pheasant, not an English, but an Indian
one, made a dart towards the eye of a person, and, instead of striking it,
wounded the os malse ; the bird, by means of its beak, struck a hole
into the superior maxillary bone, just below the zygomatic arch.

The time at which inflammation of the brain supervenes after the
injury received, is generally about a week : rarely under that time ;
and this it was that led me to say, on another occasion, that inflamma-
tion of the brain was more slow in its occurrence than that of any other
organ, in order to put you on your guard. It often happens that in-
flammation of the brain does not come on till a fortnight, or even three
weeks, after the injury: therefore, every surgeon who has written on
the subject puts you on your guard as to the distance of time this com-
plaint comes on after the accident : he tells you that the patient is not
safe till two or three weeks afterwards. If you read the works of Mr.
Pott on the injuries of the head, you will find the circumstance men-
tioned ; and in the works of Mr. Dease, of Dublin (who has published
an excellent treatise on the subject), it is distinctly stated, that inflam-
mation of the brain is occasionally postponed to three or four weeks
after the accident occurs, and even then, the patient is not always safe.
I will give you a case relating to this subject: Dr. Babington and my-
self were sent for to see a person, a clerk to the firm of Whitbread and
Company, who, whilst riding on horseback, struck his head against the
branch of a tree ; he being a short-sighted man, and riding very fast at
the time, struck himself violently against the bough of a tree which was
overhanging the road, and was brought to the ground by the force of the
blow. He was taken to Croydon, where Dr. Babington and myself
visited him. We found that he had been struck on the os fronds, just
above the frontal sinuses, where there was a depression ; and this was
the first case in which I witnessed emphysema of the forehead produced
by blowing the nose. We took all possible care of the case, bled him,
regulated his diet, &c., till the inflammation had subsided. He came
to town three weeks after the accident, when he asked whether he might
go to Rochester, to spend a little time with some friends, who were
anxious for him to come. We told him that he might, if he would pay
attention to himself, keep his bowels open, and regulate his diet. After
the lapse of a week he became extremely ill, inflammation of the brain
came on, and he died. On inquiry, we found that he had neglected the
directions given him, and allowed his bowels to get costive. It is always
a verv serious case when there is a depression on the forehead after an



FOLLOWED BY INFLAMMATION.



135



accident, and I will mention to you an instance of this kind, which will
show you the necessity of enjoining on a patient with tills injury strict
attention to his mode of living. A man who had received a wound in
the forehead from a pistol-shot, came to this hospital : the wound healed
kindly, but the depression remained. Whenever this man indulged in
the use of spirituous liquors, he used to come back with violent pain in
the head, which was always relieved by blood-letting.

As to the treatment of inflammation of the brain, it is the same as
for inflammation generally, with this exception only, that blood should
be drawn from the temporal artery in adults, and the jugular vein in
children. Whenever inflammation of the brain attacks a grown per-
son, take blood from the temporal artery ; and when young indivi-
duals, from the jugular vein ; by these means you abstract blood more
readily from the part. Even in adults you may, after opening the tem-
poral artery, if the symptoms be not relieved, bleed from the jugular
vein. In addition to this treatment, you purge, produce perspiration,
and apply blisters to the head. I have seen poultices, containing some
stimulating application, of considerable use. It will now and then
happen that trephining will be required ; and I will tell you the cases
in which it will.

1. 'Where there is extravasation of blood between the dura mater and
skull.

2. In single fractures, with depression and symptoms of compression
continuing after depletion.

3. In compound fractures, with depression, unaccompanied with
symptoms of compression.

4. It is required sometimes that an opening should be made in the
cranium, when there is matter between the dura mater and skull.

Now it generally happens in these last cases, where there is matter
between the dura mater and skull, that there is fracture, and this is an
indication that some injury has been done to the brain, when it is also
followed by rigors and other symptoms ; still it will be right, in some
cases where there is no fracture, and the other symptoms, rigors, &c. ,
are present, to penetrate the bone, to see whether matter be lodged be-
tween it and the dura mater; and this is the only case in which it is
proper.



OX THE OPERATION OF TREPHINING.

The operation of trephining used to be one of the most complicated
kind, requiring several instruments, the learning of which was in itself
quite a study ; it is now quite simple, and few instruments only are
wanted, which can very easily be put into a small case. Let us go over

N 2



136



ON THE OPERATION



the instruments formerly used in this operation : but really, gentlemen,
they were so numerous, I don’t know whether I can count them. They
used then a scalpel, rougee, pin, perforator, crown, brush, elevator, len-
ticular, and a pair of forceps ; now you may see (holding a case in his
hand), these three instruments will be quite sufficient; a knife, with a
double edge, in order to scrape off the pericranium, an elevator, and a
trephine having a crown, and a pin which will allow of being easily
moved. Now, gentlemen, I will tell you in what parts the trephine
should not be applied. First, you should never trephine in the line that
extends from just above the nose along the top of the head to the tube-
rosity of the occiput ; over the frontal sinuses it is obviously improper ;
and at the summit of the head you will meet the sagittal suture, where
the dural mater adheres with extraordinary firmness, and the longitu-
dinal sinus might also be wounded; and at the posterior part you have
the superior portion of the perpendicular spine of the os occipitis ;
therefore, in this line you ought not to trephine. I should mention this
particularly to young persons, who very often disregard this rule, think-
ing they know much better than those who have preceded them ; if,
however, they trephine in this part, the more fools they, and I will tell
you why : they are running, in operating in this part, an unnecessary
risk, by cutting on a long hole covered over by a smooth membrane,
when they might do it as well on either side. It would be the folly of
presumption to trephine on this line. There are two other parts in which
the operation of trephining should not be performed : first, over the an-
terior inferior angle of the parietal bone, just above the zygoma ; se-
condly, behind the ears, on the posterior inferior angle of the same
bone ; and why, no doubt, most of you by this time know ; opposite to
the anterior inferior angle of the parietal bone is the great artery of the
dura mater, and opposite to the posterior inferior angle is the great lateral
sinus. Fractured portions of these bones may be raised by the elevator :
and I may observe here, that this is the instrument chiefly used in cases
where the fractures are running in the direction of these parts. Mr.
Key’s saw is a very useful invention. It is gratifying to state that we
are seldom now called on to perform this operation. Suppose, how-
ever, you were called to a case requiring it, where there was a wound,
together with depression of the parietal bone, you would put your finger
into the wound, and if the portion of bone depressed were small, you
would make a simple incision, and turn the integuments aside, so as to
reach the bone. If by this incision you found depression with fracture,
you enlarge it in the course of the fracture : if the depression were
large, you would make a crucial incision, and turn aside the portion of
integument, so as to open a space for the application of the trephine :



OF TREPHINING.



137



then, with the back edge of the knife (which should be made a little
stronger than usual), you cut through the pericranium, and scrape it
off. For this purpose the rougee was formerly employed. [There was
a subject on the table, on which Sir Astley performed the operation as
he went on describing it.] Now I put the pin on the skull, and the
crown being adjusted, I fix it, and begin the circle. Well, gentlemen,
having made a circle, I remove the pin : iu young persons it will be
necessary to do this soon, because the bone is readily sawn through. I
never myself saw a case in which the pin entered the brain ; but my
nephew was present when the operation of trephining was performed,
and the pin was forgotten, so that it entered the brain, and inflammation
of the dura mater came on. I can conceive that a man in his first opera-
tion, anxious how he shall succeed, might forget it. When using the
saw, let your bearing on it be as even as possible, else you will be
through one part of the skull before another. There is but one danger
in performing the operation of trephining, and that is, wounding the
dura mater. When trephining on living subjects, you are informed of
the progress you are making by blood issuing from the wound when
you reach the diploe : and when you see the blood, you will know that
you are half through : but, recollect, in very young and old persons,
there is no diploe ; therefore, very few turns of the saw will do. A s you
proceed with the sawing, you must introduce your probe, to see how
nearly you are through : you sound as you go on. When I find that I
have sawn through in one part, I introduce the elevator, and lift the
portion of bone, the parts not cut through being easily broken. I find
by my probe that in the part near the sagittal suture I have sawn
through ; I introduce the elevator, feel the bone move, and know that a
very few turns will do, taking care not to lean on the side through
which I have already sawn. The bone can be raised and loosened ; I
am quite certain that the dura mater is not injured, and by introducing
the elevator, the bone may be removed from its place. [Here the
operation was completed.] Some people say that this is a trifling opera-
tion, not difficult to perform, nor dangerous; but they deceive you : it
is one of the most dangerous operations in surgery ; whilst performing
it there is but a single step, a small net-work, between your patient and
eternity ; saw through this, and destruction of life will generally be the
consequence. Mr. Hunter made an assertion, that when the dura
mater was wounded, the person never recovered ; which, though not
exactly borne out by the cases which have occurred since, shows the
impression made on the mind of a man who was such an observer of na-
ture. Hefore his death, Mr. Hunter saw a case of a wound of the dura
mater recover. It is certain that there is less danger when the dura



138



ON WOUNDS OF THE SCALP.



mater and pia mater are both injured ; the danger is more when the
dura mater is injured without the pia mater. I will give you the reason :
in the former case, where both the dura mater and pia mater are wounded,
a fungus immediately projects, and fills up the cavity. If, however,
there is only a small opening in the dura mater, and I were to put some
quicksilver into it, where would it go ? — into the lower part of the
spine between the tunica araclinoides and dura matral covering ; inflam-
mation of the dura mater would spread over the whole cavity of the ca-
nal, as erysipelas does over the surface of the body ; whereas, in the first
kind of injury, fungus will project through the opening, which would
easily close by the process of adhesion that would take place. I have
seen many instances where the dura mater and pia mater have been
wounded, but few where the dura mater only has been..

After trephining, the elevator should be introduced to raise the de-
pressed bone, and in this way return it to its natural situation. You
see that there is no necessity to operate where there is any risk, because
an operation in a part where there is no risk can be as well peformed,
the object being only to raise the bone*



LECTURE XIX.

ON WOUNDS OF THE SCALP.

On this subject I have but few observations to make. Wounds of the
scalp are not devoid of danger, and I have known several instances in
which apparently slight wounds of that part have destroyed life. They
are more especially dangerous if accompanied with contusion. If a
person receives a blow from an instrument capable of lacerating the
part, and considerable inflammation follows, the wound will sometimes
destroy life. There are two ways in which wounds on the scalp occa-
sionally prove destructive of life ; first, by producing erysipelas, and,
secondly, by producing inflammation of the tendon of the occipito-
frontalis.

A man came to the other hospital a short time ago with a wound of
the head from a blow which a companion had given him. The dresser
thought it too slight a case for admission into the hospital; but a few
days after tbe man returned with violent pain in the head, a consider-
able swelling of the scalp, and erysipelatous inflammation extending
over the whole face and neck. He was admitted into the hospital for
the erysipelatous inflammation, of which he afterwards died. Upon
examining the body, there was found an effusion on the membranes of



ON INJURIES OF THE SPINE.



139



the brain between the tunica arachnoides and the pia mater. The other
way in which wounds of the scalp destroy life, is by producing inflam-
mation of the tendon occipito-frontalis, which extends over the whole
surface of the head. This inflammation covers the scalp and face, and
assumes an erysipelatous character, but it is not true erysipelas. It has
not the vesicles or blisters filled with serum, which commonly attend
erysipelas, but it has a tendency rather to suppuration ; and if the con-
stitution has strength to produce this suppuration, it takes place be-
tween the tendon and the pericranium. In this way a very extensive
abscess is often formed, into which we are obliged to make an incision,
in order to discharge the matter, which cannot make its way through
the tendon. Extensive disease is thus produced, and the inflammation
attending it sometimes destroys life. I have already alluded to a case
that occurred recently, in which a person died of erysipelas, which
followed the removal of an encysted tumour. The tumour had been
removed twice before, and to prevent its recurrence, an incision was
made so deep as to lay bare the pericranium, and in this operation the
tendon had been cut through. There is a great deal of danger in
inflammation arising from this cause, and it is on that account that I
was anxious to point out to you, in a former lecture, the impro-
priety of making incisions in the scalp merely for the sake of exploring
the nature of the injury. An incision in the scalp is often attended
with considerable hazard, and should never be made unless imperious
necessity demands it.

ON INJURIES OF THE SPINE.

Injuries of the spine produce effects similar to those arising from in-
juries of the head ; the spine being liable to concussion, extravasation,
and fracture with depression.

Cases of concussion of the spine are not very unfrequent. They
occur more commonly in the lumbar region than in other parts of the
spinal column. A violent blow on the loins produces paralysis of the
lower extremities. The paralysis, however, is not complete ; the per-
son is unable to support his body, but generally some power of moving
his limbs remains. This paralytic state, arising from a blow on the
loins, is in general easily removed in the following manner: — You
apply cupping-glasses to the part, and take away blood from it several
times with the scarificator. If, at the end of a week or ten days, the
paralytic state still continues, you must apply a blister to the loins,
and keep it dressed with equal parts of the unguentumlyttm, and un-
guentum sabina:. The lytta being in this way absorbed into the
constitution, diminishes the disposition to paralysis, while the counter-



MO ON FRACTURES OF THE VERTEBRAS.

irritation also produces good effects. Such is the plan of treatment to
be pursued in cases of concussion of the spine. With respect to extra-
vasation on the spine, the examples are but few in which this has occur-
red. The cases which are more particularly impressed upon my mind
are, first, one which was examined in this hospital by Mr. Henry Cline.
A person received a severe blow near the cauda equina, by the last
dorsal vertebra. He had paralysis of the lower extremities, and shortly
after died.

The second case was one under Mr. Heaviside, in which I and Dr.
Baillie were also consulted. A young gentleman was swinging with a
party of boys, when one of his companions pushed him, that he might
rise as high as possible, while two others ran in the opposite direction,
and caught him in the neck with a rope, as he descended. He was
thrown out of the swing, and when he was taken up, was found to be
paralytic in the lower extremities. He soon became paralytic in his
upper extremities also, and a few weeks afterwards he was brought to
town in this state. It was suspected that there was some disease of the
spine, produced by the injury the neck received, when the rope sud-
denly caught it, but no deformity could be discovered. An issue in the
neck was advised, with a view of producing counter-irritation ; but be-
fore this plan could be carried into effect, the boy died. On examining
the body, it was found that one of the vertebral arteries had burst, and
that extensive extravasation had taken place from the foramen magnum
to the sixth cervical vertebra. The whole sheath of the spinal marrow
was covered with blood. Mr. Heaviside has a beautiful preparation
made from this subject. These cases, probably, admit of no remedy
where the extravasation is considerable. I do not know what can be
done, except to bleed in the first instance, in order to prevent further
extravasation ; and afterwards to promote absorption, and excite coun-
ter-irritation by the application of blisters. I mention these cases to you
as worth knowing, that you may make your own observations on them
when they occur, rather than as cases about the treatment of which much
is understood in the present state of our knowledge. They are of too
rare occurrence to enable us to lay down any positive principles as to the
mode in which they are to be treated.

ON FRACTURES OF THE VERTEBRAE.

Fractures with displacement of the spine are by no means unfrequent ;
they have been improperly called dislocations ; but dislocations of the
spine are extremely rare, and only occur in the cervical vertebr®. What
are called dislocations are, in fact, fractures with displacement. It is
not that one vertebra is separated from another, for this very rarely



ON FRACTURES OF THE VERTEBRAE. 141






happens, and only in the cervical ; but that the vertebra is broken
through. When fracture with displacement of the spine occurs, para-
lysis takes place in the parts of the body situated below the injury. If
it occur in the loins, paralysis of the lower' extremities follows; the
power of retaining the fteces, and of expelling the urine, is lost. When
the injury occurs in the dorsal vertebra, there is paralysis of the lower
extremities ; the same loss of power in retaining the faces and expel-
ling the urine, with this addition, that it is accompanied with consider-
able inflation of the abdomen. This inflation might lead the surgeon
at first to suppose that there was some rupture of the intestines ; but
after a few hours, when the patient has had free evacuations, this inflated
state of the intestines disappears. The inflation is produced by the great
secretion of air into the intestines, in consequence of the diminished
powers of the part.

When the injury occurs in the lower part of the cervical vertebrae,
paralysis takes place in the upper as well as the lower extremities,
though not in the same degree. There is a numbness of the upper ex-
tremities, but seldom such a degree of paralysis as to deprive the patient
of all power, when the injury occurs below the fourth cervical. The time
in which the person dies from these injuries varies according to the seat
of the accident. If it occur in the loins, the patient will generally die
in from five to six weeks ; if the displacement be very considerable, he
may die in three weeks : on the other hand, when the displacement is
slight, the patient may live many weeks, and even months. I have
known a person live two years after an injury which was supposed to be
a case of fracture, with displacement of the lumbar vertebrae. As there
was no examination of the body, after death, in the case to which I
allude, some doubt must necessarily exist as to the exact nature of the
injury ; for morbid anatomy can alone teach you the real nature of dis-
ease. When fracture with displacement occurs in the dorsal vertebrae,
the patient generally lives a much shorter time ; though even in this
case I have known a person live nine months. A person of the city,
named W., riding on Epsom Downs, at full speed, came to a road which
led to a chalk or gravel-pit, and finding that he could not stop his horse,
he put spurs to him to endeavour to clear the pit. He succeeded in
doing this, but the horse, in consequence of the effort, fell on the oppo-
site side, relied over him, and broke his dorsal vertebra:. Paralysis of
the lower extremities followed, but this gentleman lived four or five
months after the injury. When fracture with displacement occurs be-
tween the fourth and seventh cervical vertebrae, the patient generally
lives from four to five days. I have known a person die as early as
forty-eight hours after the injury. If the injury occur between the



142 ON FRACTURES OF THE VERTEBRA?.

second and third, or between the third and fourth cervical vertebra;, the
person dies on the instant.

Those who have attended in the dissecting room can readily explain
how this happens, and would, perhaps, feel themselves insulted if I
were to explain it to them. Those who have dissected less will excuse
me for saying that instant death ensues in this case, because the injury
occurs above the origin of the phrenic nerve, which is the only agent in
supporting respiration after pressure on the spinal marrow has occurred.
The function of respiration, after pressure on the spinal marrow, is
supported by the diaphragm only, and when the fracture with dis-
placement occurs above the origin of the phrenic nerve, the diaphragm
loses its power, and instant dissolution is the result.

But it sometimes happens that the cervical vertebra; are broken
without displacement. When this occurs, some curious circumstances
take place. At the time I lived with Mr. Cline, the following case
occurred: — A girl received a severe blow on the neck, after which it
was found, that whenever she attempted to look at any thing above her
head, she was under the necessity of putting her hands behind it, and
gradually elevating it to the object. When she wanted to look at any
thing beneath her head, she put her hands under her chin, and lowered
her head to the object. If any other child in play ran against her and
shook her body, the concussion produced uneasy sensations, and she
would run to a table, or any place on which she could rest her head,
and support it with her hands under her chin until the agitation
produced by the shock had subsided. The child lived twelve months
after the accident. On examining the body after death, Mr. Cline
found the atlas broken through ; there was a transverse fracture of the
atlas, but no displacement. When she endeavoured to raise her head,
the dentiform process quitted its natural situation, and carried back a
portion of the atlas; when her head inclined forward, pressure was
produced upon the spinal marrow, as it was likewise when the body
was agitated. This is a curious instance of fracture occurring in the
cervical vertebrae without displacement. With respect to the treatment
of fracture, with displacement of the spine, nothing has hitherto been
effectually done in surgery.

Mr. Henry Cline was the first person who attempted to give relief in
this accident. Being an excellent anatomist, and a most able surgeon,
he saw no reason why cases of this kind should not be treated as cases
of fracture with depression of the skull. Accordingly he cut down
upon the arch of the spinal marrow, where the compression was greatest,
and, with a small trephine of his own invention, he sawed through the
arch of the spinous process, and took off’ the pressure on the spinal



ON FRACTURES OF THE VERTEBRAS. 143

marrow, by raising the depressed portion of the arch. It is well
known, that in cases of fracture where the displacement has been slight
union of the bone has been produced. There would be no difficulty in
producing this union, supposing the pressure on the spinal marrow to
be removed. There is a preparation in Mr. Brookes’s collection, from
a case of fracture with depression, where the person lived long enough
for the fracture to be united ; and in the College of Surgeons there is a
preparation presented by Mr. Harold, of Cheshunt, from a case where
union of the bone took place after fracture with displacement. There
is no danger, therefore, as to the restoration of the arch of the bone, if
the pressure on the spinal marrow could be removed; and it was with
this view that Mr. Cline sawed through the arch. It is right, however,
to mention, that in many of these cases the spinal marrow is itself torn
through. In some cases of fracture with displacement, it is completely
torn; in others partially; and in some not at all. In cases where it
has not been torn, there would be hope from such an operation; and it
is in these cases that the operation has been performed. Mr. Tyrrell
has attempted the operation since Mr. Cline, but both cases have ter-
minated unfavourably. Whether future experiments may be attended
with better success it is impossible to say. The proposal was plausible;
the operation was easily performed; and as to the result, if the spinal
marrow were not torn, there seems no reason why a person should not
recover after such an operation. We are obliged, however, to speak
doubtingly on this subject, since the first experiments have been un-
successful. If you could save one life in ten, ay, one in a hundred, by
such an operation, it is your duty to attempt it, notwithstanding any
objections which some foolish persons may have urged against it.
Suppose any one now present were in this state himself; suppose him
put to bed with a paralysis of his lower extremities, and fully ac-
quainted with the inevitable result if nothing were done; would he not
be glad to have any attempt made to save him ? Would it not be
foolish and unmanly to say, he would rather die than have such an
attempt made ? The operation is not severe — it cannot add to his
danger ; and as to the pain, no man who is a man would regard it. In
the two cases in which the attempt was made, the operation did not
shorten life ; on the contrary, there is reason to believe that it prolonged
it. You will be justified, therefore, in making the attempt. Though
I may not live long enough to see the operation frequently performed,
I have no doubt that it will be occasionally performed with success.
There is no reason why it should not; and he who says that it ought
not to be attempted is a blockhead.

I shall now proceed to describe to you



144



ON ANEURISM.



ANEURISM.

Aneurism is a pulsating tumour containing blood, and communi-
cating with the interior of an artery. There is one exception to this
definition, namely, where aneurism, as it sometimes happens, takes
place in the heart.

Aneurisms are situated either externally or internally; that is, they
are either so situated on the limbs as that access may be had to them,
and the nature of the disease clearly ascertained ; or they are so placed
in cavities of the body, such as the abdomen, chest, and cranium, as to
render the nature of the disease very often extremely doubtful. With
respect to external aneurisms, the symptoms mav be divided into three
stages. When you have an opportunity of seeing aneurism in its early
stage, you will find a small tumour pulsating very strongly — much
more strongly than in subsequeht stages; for it may be taken as a
general rule that the force of the pulsation is in the inverse proportion
of the size of the aneurism. When an aneurism is first formed, it
contains only fluid blood; and if you apply your finger to the artery
between the aneurism and the heart, you will readily empty the aneu-
rismal bag by the pressure. In this state there is scarcely any pain,
and no other alteration in the limb than some irregularity of circulation
producing spasm in the muscles; and when the patient is going to rest,
cramps in the legs, and sudden twitchings, which prevent him from
sleeping. The next state in which we find aneurism is, when the blood
is beginning to coagulate in the interior of the sac, the coats of which
are very considerably thickened. At this time, if you press on the
artery, you may empty the sac in part ; you will see the swelling re-
produced when you take off the pressure. You cannot completely
empty the bag by pressure, for a considerable degree of swelling will
still remain. There is some degree of pain in the limb below in this
stage of the disease, in consequence of the size of the swelling and the
pressure on the surrounding parts. The aneurism becomes a solid
swelling, instead of a mere bag containing fluid blood, and the circu-
lation is retarded by the pressure on the surrounding parts.

In the next stage the aneurism has acquired considerable magnitude,
and the pulsation is in a great degree lost. Pulsation may be observed
in some one part opposite to the opening from the artery, but it is
seldom perceived over the whole swelling. A small portion of the
blood still continues in a fluid state, but the greater part of it is filled
with coagulum. In this state, if the aneurism be behind a joint, the
motion of that joint becomes impeded. Popliteal aneurism is one of
very common occurrence ; there is an enlargement behind the knee,



ON ANEURISM.



145



just at the bend of the joint, with a pulsation : the foot and leg of that
side are swollen; the swelling gradually increases, and the aneurism
becomes of a dark colour; inflammation of the cuticle covering the sac
ensues, vesication of the cutis to the size of half-a-crown takes place,
and the skin in this part is quite insensible. In a few days an eschar
is formed, the bag opens; bleedings, one after another, take place, and
the destruction of life is the consequence. What you read in books
respecting the mode in which death is produced in these complaints is,
that the sac bursts, and the patient is destroyed by the sudden gush of
blood; but, I tell you, gentlemen, it is no such thing; it is not from
the sudden bursting of the aneurismal bag that the person dies, but by
repeated bleedings from the part. At first the bleeding is small, but
as the eschar increases, and the separation of the parts takes place, it
becomes more; the wound is produced by means of the sloughing
process, like a slough in any other part, and an opening is formed which
leads into the aneurismal bag. At the commencement the wound is
small, and blood issues from the part ; lint is applied to the wound, and
the hemorrhage is stopped; but as the eschar proceeds, and the size of
the wound increases, the hemorrhage returns ; and thus, by repeated
hemorrhage, destruction of life is produced, and not by any sudden
discharge of blood from the sac; it is notin aneurism of the extremities
only that death thus takes place, but in aneurisms that occur internally ;
in the chest, for instance, the same circumstances happen as I have just
mentioned. Aneurisms, if not operated on, are not always destructive
of life. 1 have seen grangrene of the foot and leg, as far as the knee,
from aneurism, take place, without destroying life. I saw a case where
die foot and lower part of the leg became gangrenous in a man labouring
under popliteal aneurism; they sloughed off’; amputation was performed
just above the ankle, and the patient recovered. Destruction of life,
then, takes place in aneurism from repeated hemorrhage and gangrene.
Gangrene of a small part of the limb in aneurism may occur, and still
be remedied by means of surgical aid.

The history of internal aneurism is different from that of the external.
I will describe it to you in a few words, though the subject is by far
too ample to be properly treated of at present. I mentioned to you just
now, in the definition that 1 gave you of aneurism, that there was an ex-
ception to it, and that was the heart itself, when the subject of aneurism.
Here is an aneurism (pointing to one on the table) of the heart: this
and two others are all that I have ever seen ; for what are often called
aneurisms of the heart are not really so — they are a simple dilatation of
the ventricles. An aneurism of the heart consists of a bag formed out
of the parietes of that organ, and in this bag an opening is formed, as

o



146



ON ANEURISM OF THE AORTA.



in the aneurisms which take place in arteries. In this specimen there
is a bag formed of the parietes of the left ventricle, considerably larger
than an orange, together with an opening which communicates with it.
The other instances which I have seen of aneurism of the heart are the
following : A soldier of the guards had committed some offence, for

which he was severely flogged; being a determined fellow, he resolved
not to cry, and whilst he was receiving the punishment he held hi3
breath; a short time after this he was seized with violent paiti in the
chest ; Mr. Palmer, surgeon to the guards, was sent for, and he found
him dying, as he thought, of ascites and oedema of the lower extremities.
He soon died, and on examination it was found that there was an aneu-
rism of the left ventricle, which had burst, as the pericardium was very
much distended with blood. Mr. P., of Chichester, surgeon to the
militia, was sent for, to see a man who had symptoms of diseased heart,
and intermittingpulsation ; he had also ascites and oedema of the lower
extremities. This man died, and there was found an aneurism of the
left auricle. A curious circumstance in this case was, that the blood
had insinuated itself into the coats of the left auricle ; the aneurism
was of the size of a walnut ; its coats had given way, and nature, as it
were, thus unloaded herself. These three cases of aneurism of the
heart are the only ones that I have seen.

ANEURISM OF THE AORTA.

Aneurism of the ascending aorta, just at its commencement, where
it is covered by the pericardium, is not of uncommon occurrence. Here
are two examples of aneurism in that situation (pointing to the spe-
cimens on the table) of the size of a walnut ; they had burst into the
pericardium, which, on examination, was found filled with blood. I
will give you a singular case, in order to put you on your guard, as
you must expect to meet with thorns as well as flowers in the profession.
A man was brought to the other hospital labouring under popliteal
aneurism; I told him he must submit to an operation. In order to
have the principal artery of the thigh secured, he sat down on the table,
and was placed in the usual position ; before I had quite reached the.
sartorius muscle, I saw him stretch himself on his back, and perceived
urine coming from the penis. I immediately said, This is more than
the expression of pain and the apprehension of danger. He got up,
made a gasp ; I took out a lancet, opened a vein, but no blood came.
I then tried to obtain some from the jugular, but in vain ; in three
minutes he was quite dead. I said, gentlemen, as you have seen the
death, you shall see the examination. He was conveyed to the dead-
house ; and the next day I opened the chest, and found the pericardium



ON ANEURISM OF THE AORTA.



147



distended with blood, containing from a pint to a quart; and at the
beginning of the aorta, just above the valves, there was an aneurism of
the size of a walnut, which had burst. It is well that in this case the
ligature was not applied, or the principal vessel divided, else the surgeon
would probably have had the credit of killing the patient. I mention
this case to put you on your guard, that you should never operate for
aneurism till you have ascertained whether there be one situated in any
other part ; for it frequently happens that aneurisms attack several
parts at the same time. This I know, that a man came into this
(St. Thomas’s) hospital with popliteal aneurism : and the operation
was about to be performed, when, on account of a pain in the abdomen,
it was postponed. Before the next operating day he had died suddenly,
and, on examination, an aneurism was found between the two emulgent
arteries. Well, then, before you operate for aneurism, see whether
there be pain and pulsation in any other part.



LECTURE XX.

ANEURISM OF THE ASCENDING AORTA.

When an aneurism takes place between the heart and curvature of the
aorta, you find, after a time, from the pressure of the aneurismal bag,
the cartilages of the ribs become absorbed, as in the specimen before
me (pointing to one on the table), where the cartilages of three of the
ribs, and a portion of the sternum, have been absorbed ; when the aneu-
rism presses on the lungs, dyspnoea comes on, together with cough, and
the complaint is obscure, but at last the fulness on the right side, and
the pulsation to be felt by the pressure of the hand on the intercostal
spaces, will enable you to distinguish this disease ; then the ribs become
absorbed, the aneurism presses against the pectoral muscle, absorption
reaches the skin, and the sac bursts by the inflammation of the skin, the
destruction of the life of the part, and the separation of the eschar. I
will mention to you a case which shows how life may be prolonged
sometimes by the formation of an artificial sac : a female in the other
hospital had an aneurism of the ascending aorta ; the skin had become
inflamed, the eschar was separating, and a small quantity of blood was
discharged; a clot of blood plugged up the orifice of the opening;
pieces of lint were applied, over which was put some adhesive plaster,
and lastly a bandage. She lived twenty-seven days afterwards ; the
opening of the wound, however, gradually increased, and she died in
consequence of inflammation of the interior of the aneurismal bag and
aorta.



148



ON ANEURISM OF THE AORTA.



When, therefore, you are called to a person with an aneurism in this
part, and when hemorrhage has come on, you can protract life by
coating the wound with lint, and endeavouring to form an artificial sac ;
and by this means you give your patient two or three days, or weeks, to
live, allowing him that time for making any preparation he may wish.
These cases are, however, quite hopeless, and I have never known one
spontaneously cured.

ANEURISMS OF THE CURVATURE OF THE AORTA.

These aneurisms are very frequent, and are to be seen just above the
sternum. You will find that termination of existence takes place in
different modes in these aneurisms. In the specimen before me (ex-
hibiting one on the table), death was produced by the bursting of the
artery into the trachea ; it was given me by Mr. Davis, and was taken
from a man, the subject of aneurism of long existence; rising from his
bed one day, the artery must have burst into the air tube, cough came
on with a sudden gush of blood, and he died, partly from suffocation,
and partly from loss of blood. An aneurism of this kind often causes,
by its pressure, dyspnocca and suffocation ; it also often presses behind
on the oesophagus, instead of in front on the sternum ; it will be seen
in the back, through the ribs, by the edge of the scapula, between its
base and the spine. Now, gentlemen, I will tell you one or two
practical points here, to put you on your guard, and induce you to take
great care in these cases. Mr. Dyson, of the city, called on me one day,
and said that he had a patient with aneurism of the neck, which he
thought was an aneurism of the carotid, and that he should like me to
see it. I immediately went with him, and on examining, midway
between the clavicle and lower jaw, there appeared to be a collection of
fluid proceeding to behind the sternum. I told Mr. Dyson, that I was
yery doubtful of its being an aneurism of the carotid. Some time after
this, Mr. Dyson sent for me to go with him to examine the body of
this person ; we found a small pouch, just behind the sternum, pro-
ceeding from the curvature of the aorta. It was of very great importance
that a ligature had not been applied ; the sac would have been cut
through, and destruction of life taken place. The late Mr. Burns, of
Glasgow, who was an excellent anatomist, and who published a capital
work on the anatomy of the head and neck, wrote to me to say that he
had a case of aneurism above the clavicle, and entertained some thoughts
of tying the subclavian artery for it, and asked me some question
relative to it, to which I returned an answer, and said to him, Take
care, do not deceive yourself, for what often appear to be aneurisms of
the subclavian artery, are really aneurisms of the aorta. The operation



ON ANEURISM OF THE AORTA.



J49



was not performed. (It is mentioned in Mr. Burns’ work.) The
patient afterwards died, and on examination it was found that it was
an aneurism of the aorta ; therefore I mention this to put you on your
guard, for after what you have lately seen at Guy’s Hospital, don’t
think the operation an easy one, and that it would add greatly to your
credit to perform it. You might very easily mistake aneurism of the
aorta for aneurism of the carotid or subclavian arteries.

ANEURISM OF THE ARTERIA INNOM1NATA.

These cases in general do not allow of an operation being performed ;
there is no room for a ligature. Dr. Mott, of America, has put a
ligature on this vessel ; and for a time the patient appeared to be doing
well ; but he afterwards died. The operation did him much credit :
few would have dared to perform it; and those who might have dared,
probably would not have known how. Dr. Mott is an excellent
anatomist, and an industrious man.

ANEURISM OF THE DESCENDING AORTA.

When the descending aorta is the subject of aneurism, in its course
through the posterior mediastinum, it very often breaks into the oeso-
phagus, as in the preparation before me (pointing to one on the table),
and a similar instance of which may be seen in the museum of the
other hospital ; when an aneurism presses on the oesophagus, adhesion
ot the coat of the sac to the oesophagus takes place, and afterwards an
opening between the aneurismal bag and gullet is formed $ the patient
vomits a considerable quantity of blood, and soon dies. I have seen
three instances of this kind of aneurism in persons who have died of
some other complaint.

ANEURISM OF THE ABDOMINAL AORTA.

When the aneurism is situated above the cceliac artery, a pulsation
may be distinctly felt at the scrobiculus cordis ; and a symptom which
distinguishes this complaint is, that the pressure on the stomach caused
by the aneurismal bag produces nausea and vomiting, and small quan-
tities of food are immediately rejected. There was a case in this hos-
pital of aneurism just above the cceliac artery, where the patient had
frequent vomiting, constant nausea, and could not bear to take any
food. W hen the aneurism is lower down in the cavity of the abdomen,
it often bursts into the intestine. Here is a specimen (holding it in his
hand), where there is an opening in the jejunum and the fore part of
the aneurismal tumour, of which the patient died. It was taken from
a near relation of an eminent physician. Dr. S. brought him, in order



150



ON THE SIZE OF 4.NEURISMS.



that I might give my opinion of a pulsation in the abdomen ; he dined
with me, we made as light of it as possible, and he was very cheerful
at dinner; three weeks afterwards I was sent for to Henbury, to visit
him ; he was seized with discharge (if blood by stool ; he revived a little,
and hopes of recovery were entertained by his friends ; the following
morning, however, the discharge of blood returned, and he died suddenly.

When the aneurismal tumour presses on the spine, absorption of the
vertebra; takes place, as in this instance (exhibiting a specimen) ; you
will also find a large swelling in the loins ; but you must be on your
guard respecting this swelling, lest it be mistaken for any other com-
plaint. One of the surgeons of this hospital, but who is since dead,
had a patient with a swelling in his loins; this the surgeon took for
lumbar abscess ; he took out his lancet, and introduced it obliquely,
when some florid blood issued by the side of the instrument. Adhesive
plaster was put to the wound, and it healed ; he died, however, from
the irritation of the aneurismal sac. On examination, it was found that
the swelling was from the aneurismal tumour, the lancet had not pene-
trated into it, but wounded its coats. There is no pulsation to be felt
in the loins from those tumours, nor was there any in the case I have just
mentioned, and this is owing to the distance of the swelling from the aorta;
thus men that are well informed in their profession may commit mis-
takes in these obscure cases. Aneurisms form in the cavity of the pelvis,
in the ischiatic notch, and under the gluteus maximus muscle; you will
be on your guard, therefore, when you find tumours on the nates. A
man was sent from Gainsborough to the other hospital with an aneurism
or tumour on the nates ; I hesitated at first respecting its nature ;
hemorrhage came on from the bladder, when it was immediately
thought that the aneurism adhered to the bladder, and an opening into
it had been formed, as was afterwards found to be the case on examina-
tion. This is all it will be necessary to say to you on the subject of
internal aneurisms, as the symptoms will vary according to the seat in
which the disease may be found ; the digestive organs will be in fault
at one time, the urinary at another, according to the part on which the
pressure of the aneurismal sac may rest ; from the variety of symptoms,
the diagnosis will of course be found to be difficult.

ON THE SIZE OF ANEURISMS.

The aneurism before me is the largest I ever saw (a beautiful speci-
men was here exhibited) : it begins in the aorta at the emulgcnt arteries,
and extends into the cavity of the pelvis. It contained blood (and 1
am not exactly certain how much), but of an enormous weight. Here
(showing another specimen) is a popliteal aneurism of considerable



ON THE FORMATION OF ANEURISM.



151



size. The greatest number of aneurisms that I have seen in one case
is seven, and this specimen on the table was taken from the man to
whom I allude. He died of an aneurism at the bifurcation ; he also had
one at the opposite ham, two above it, one in the groin, and two others.
The iliac artery had been tied for femoral aneurism, and the patient did
well for some time, but afterwards died. This man was a bricklayer’s
labourer ; had been accustomed to mount ladders and carry weights up
great heights ; had been in the habit of exercising his lower extremities
a good deal : he was not very muscular, and the fatigue of his occupa-
tion was more than he could bear. I may observe here, that some
aneurisms are local, and others general ; when they occur in the ham
they are frequently only local ; but when between the groin and ham,
or in the middle of the thigh, you very commonly find disease of other
arteries. Therefore, in popliteal aneurism, you expect to find the aorta
and larger arteries healthy.

The age at which aneurisms generally occur is from 30 to 50 : at that
age exercise is considerable and strength less. In very old age this com-
plaint is not so common. I have seen a popliteal aneurism in a man of
80, four or five years ago, at the other hospital ; on this man I tied the
femoral artery, and he did extremely well. On a man of 6!) I have
operated, and that case did well. I saw a boy in this hospital 11 years
old, with aneurism of the anterior tibial artery. The man of 80 is the
oldest, and the boy of 1 1 the youngest, that I have seen with aneurism.
It is more commonly met with between 30 and 50, or rather between 30
and 40, than after that time. In cases of aneurism, the age is no objec-
tion to the operation.

With respect to the sex in which aneurism chiefly occurs, the male
is certainly much more frequently the subject of it than the female. I
should say that the proportion of males to females is about five to one ;
and if we take only cases of popliteal aneurism, the proportion of males
would be considerably greater. When aneurisms do occur in females,
they are generally internal. Females are rarely the subjects of aneurism
in the limbs ; the reason of which is, that they do not exert them so
much as the other sex. In the course of my practice, taking hospital
and private practice together, I have seen about eight cases of popliteal
aneurisms in the female. The number of popliteal aneurisms which I
have seen in the male is of course very considerable.

OX THE FORMATION OF ANEURISMS.

It is necessary that you should clearly understand the manner in
which aneurism is produced. The first circumstance that takes place
in an artery which is about to produce aneurismal swelling is, that it



V



152 ON THE FORMATION OF ANEURISM.

becomes opaque, and slightly inflamed. A small yellow spot appears
in the part where the aneurism is afterwards formed, and there is a
slight efflorescence surrounding it. The process of absorption after-
wards takes place, and thins the coat of the artery so that the texture
. becomes like that of a fine web. At the same time that this takes

place, nature begins to set up a process of defence, which is beautifully
exemplified in a preparation (it was exhibited to the class) made from
the first aneurism which I had an opportunity of dissecting. .This was
an incipient aneurism of the aorta ; you perceive that the coat of the
artery has been absorbed, and opposite to the parts absorbed you ob- *
serve a layer of adhesive matter, by means of which a defence is set up
for the coat of the artery, and the progress of the disease for a time re-
• sisted. A covering is thus produced by the adhesive inflammation
which shuts up the artery, so as to prevent the immediate escape of the
blood. This preparation not only beautifully illustrates this process,
but, by holding a candle on the opposite side of it, you will also ob-
serve the opacity which I have just described. As the coat of the artery
becomes absorbed, the cellular membrane is glued by this matter to the
outer surface of the artery. The next substance which becomes ab-

I sorbed, if it be an aneurism of the ascending aorta, is the pleura, which

forms a portion of the aneurismal bag. Then the lungs become ab-
sorbed, and form a portion of the bag ; next the intercostal muscles,
with the cartilages of the ribs; then the pectoral muscle; and at last
the skin itself, forming the parietes of the aneurism, give way, and
there is no longer any thing to prevent the escape of the blood.

Every aneurism was formerly supposed to be produced by the dila-
tation of the coats of the artery ; but it has been found that this is not
the case. It is generally produced, not by the dilatation, but by the
absorption of the coats of the artery. For this knowledge we are
indebted to Scarpa, who first accurately explained the mode in which
aneurisms are produced. He thought they were always produced in
this way ; but they are sometimes, though rarely, formed in the way in
which they were formerly supposed to be uniformly produced ; namely ^
by dilatation. Here is a specimen of an aneurism of the aorta, in which
the pouch is formed by dilatation, the coats of the artery still remaining.

Aneurisms are now and then the effect of the bursting of an artery
under some considerable exertion. I have known two instances of this
kind. A gentleman who was out shooting jumped over a ditch, when,
on reaching the other side, his foot slipped, and he fell back into the
ditch. At this moment he felt something snap in his ham, and when
he attempted to walk he found himself lame from the accident. He
was attended by Mr. Holt, a surgeon at Tottenham, and was afterwards

111 - 1






ON THE FORMATION OF ANEURISM.



153



brought to town, where he underwent an operation for popliteal aneu-
rism. In this case the aneurism began to form within a very short
time after the accident, and it was not more than from three to five
weeks afterwards that the operation was performed. The other case in
which I have known an aneurism produced by the bursting of an artery
occurred as follows : — A gentleman whom I was attending for another
complaint, in attempting to raise himself in bed upon his hands, felt
something snap in his right hand. When I next visited him, he told
me the circumstance, and requested me to look at his hand. Upon
putting my finger upon it, I felt a pulsating aneurismal swelling. I
tried what could be done by pressure ; but as this did not succeed, I
found it necessary to tie the radial artery at the part where we usually
feel the pulse. In this case a bag of considerable size was formed by
the cellular membrane, instead of the usual mode. A pointed body
introduced into an artery will produce all the appearances of aneurism,
and require the same treatment. In whatever way, in short, aneurism
is produced, the surgical treatment of it will be the same. A curious
circumstance may be observed in dissecting an aneurism, after having
turned back the aneurismal sac. You would suppose that when you
had made an incision in the parts, you would immediately find the
cavity in which the blood is contained ; but this is not the case. On
the inner side of the aneurismal sac a wall of adhesive matter is depo-
sited in layers so as to enclose the blood as completely as the aneurismal
sac itself. Here is a preparation in which the aneurismal sac has been
taken away, and yet you find a bag remaining entirely formed of layers
of adhesive matter on the outer side of the aneurism. The process by
which nature throws up one layer of adhesive matter after another,
until a complete bag is produced, is beautifully illustrated in this pre-
paration.

You may distinguish aneurism from other diseases by the following
marks : — If the aneurism be recent, by pressing your finger on the
artery which leads to the aneurism, you will empty the aneurismal bag ;
but if the aneurism be of longer duration, and the pulsation be but
slight, place yourself by the side of your patient, observe carefully the
size of the swelling, and, by pressing your finger on the artery above,
you will see the aneurism sink down as you make the pressure, though
the sac will not entirely empty itself; and upon raising your hand sud-
denly, you will observe a jet of blood rush into the aneurismal sac, and
raise it to its former height. In this manner an aneurism may be easily
distinguished from another tumour deriving its pulsation from an
artery : in the former case the pulsation will be felt over every part of
the tumour, in the latter there will be no pulsation except in the direc-



154



ON THE CURE OF ANEURISM.



tion of the artery. I have hurried over some parts of this evening’s
lecture, as it is my intention to show you the operation for popliteal
aneurism, having a subject which will answer the purpose extremely
well. I shall postpone, therefore, some remarks which I have to make
upon the medical treatment of aneurism, and proceed at once to speak of
the surgical operation for its cure.

ON THE CURE OF ANEURISMS.

Aneurisms sometimes undergo a spontaneous cure. This is a cir-
cumstance which you should bear inmind, because in cases where they
are so situated as not to admit of surgical relief, it is a consolation to
the patient to know that these diseases now and then cure themselves.
There are many examples of such a spontaneous cure: I have myself
seen some, and many more are to be found in surgical and medical
authors. There is a preparation before us, taken from a man in the
other hospital, who had an aneurism, situated just below the groin,
which underwent a spontaneous cure. He was sitting before the fire, in
one of the wards of the hospital, when he felt something burst in the
upper part of his thigh. On examination he found no blood had issued
out, and, in fact, the aneurism had not yet reached the skin so as to be
adherent to it. His thigh was, however, enormously swollen ; he was
unable to use the limb, and was put to bed by the other patients. For
three days after a pulsation was found in the aneurism ; it then ceased,
and the size of the limb began to diminish. At the end of four months
the aneurismal swelling had considerably diminished, and he recovered
the use of the limb. Six months after he first felt this sensation, and
when he had been discharged from the hospital, I met him as I was
walking across the square of the other hospital, I said to him, “ Why,
Powell, you seem low-spirited ; you ought to be cheerful, for you have
had a very narrow escape.” “ Yes,” said the man, “ I am pretty well,
sir, except that I have something alive in my belly .” — (A laugh .) — “ I
hope you have,” said I, “ for it would be rather awkward if you had
not.” On putting my hand on his abdomen, I felt a pulsating swelling
there. This aneurism shortly afterwards burst into the abdomen, and the
man died. On examination of the body, it was found that the anuerism
in the thigh, just below Poupart’s ligament, had burst under the fascia
lata ; a great accumulation of blood took place, which pressed upon the
vessel, and the femoral artery was obliterated. Sir W. Blizard had a
patient at Walworth, with popliteal aneurism, which was cured sponta-
neously. Mr. Ford mentions several cases; and Dr. Baillie met with
two cases of carotid aneurism, which cured themselves. Mr. Crampton,
the surgeon-general at Dublin, has given an account of a case in which



OX THE CURE OF ANEURISM.



155



the aneurism gradually wasted in the abdomen, and obliterated the
aorta.

An account of a similar case has been given by Baron Larrey, the
French surgeon. An Irish gentleman, whose name does not at this
moment occur to me, in passing through this metropolis, on his way to .
Paris, showed me a preparation from a case of spontaneous cure of aneu-
rism, in which the aorta was obliterated at the loins.

As the spontaneous cure of this disease, however, cannot be so far
depended upon as to prevent us from performing the operation in all
situations where the artery is accessible, I shall proceed to describe to
you the mode of performing the operation in the different parts of the
body, confining myself, in this evening’s lecture, to the operation on
the femoral artery. As we are occasionally under the necessity of per-
forming the operation as it used to be done thirty-five or forty years ago,

I shall, in the first place, say a few words on the old operation. The
operation for popliteal aneurism used to be performed in the following
manner : — A tourniquet was placed on the limb, and the patient laid
on his face. An incision was then made in the ham, to the extent of the
aneurism, and the adhesive matter and coagulated blood removed from
the excavation thus made. The aneurismal bag was then wiped out
with a sponge, and the tourniquet was slightly loosened, in order to
mark the orifice of the artery. The surgeon stood ready with a probe
in his hand, and as soon as he saw the blood issue from the upper
orifice, he passed it into the artery, and then separating that portion of
the artery from the remaining parts, put a ligature upon it. When he had
done this, he again loosened the tourniquet, and as soon as he saw what
appeared to be venous blood spring from the lower portion of the artery
(for the blood from the upper portion of the artery is florid, as arterial
blood usually is, but in the lower portion it has the appearance of venous
blood), he introduced the probe into the orifice, and put a ligature on
the artery as before. An operation like this, which exposed a very con-
siderable surface, where the artery in the vicinity of the aneurism was
diseased, and by which the bones were frequently injured, from the
ulcerative process taking place, necessarily led very frequently to fatal
results ; so frequently, indeed, that it was a disputed point among the
profession whether it was better to amputate in cases of popliteal aneu-
rism, or to perform this operation. A man who had recovered after the
old operation for popliteal aneurism could, formerly, get money by
showing himself at the hospitals ; at present it would not be worth a
man’s while to begin this way. It is to Mr. John Hunter that we are
indebted for the great improvement which has taken place in this branch
of surgery. But for Mr. John Hunter, we might still have the same



156



ON THE CURE OF ANEURISM.



difficulties to encounter, and patients labouring under this disease might
still have been exposed to the same danger.

Mr. Hunter being an excellent physiologist, and an admirable
anatomist, applied the powers of his active and inquiring mind to this
subject. He said, “ I have frequently tied the femoral artery in ani-
mals, without injury ; why should not I put a ligature on the artery, in
the same way, in the human subject?”

It is right, however, to observe, that Mr. Hunter was led to this
train of thought by having under his care a case of popliteal aneurism,
of such extent as to have reached the tendon of the triceps, so that there
was no room for the application of a ligature between the aneurismal
sac and the tendon. He determined, therefore, to make the experiment
of tying the femoral artery, rather than amputate the limb. The first
operation was not, as might be expected, performed in the very best
manner. He was not content with a single ligature, but applied
several, which were left hanging out of the wound, and which were af-
terwards discharged by a process of ulceration. Yet, under all these
disadvantages, the patient recovered, and lived rather more than twelve
months after the operation. On dissection, it was fcund that the fe-
moral artery was obliterated as far as the arteria profunda. Since Mr.
Hunter’s time, several slight alterations have been made in the operation
for popliteal aneurism, as every surgeon has his whim ; but the princi-
ple established by Mr. Hunter remains the same, and that greatsurgeon
has the undoubted merit of having substituted a simple and beautiful
operation for one of very considerable difficulty and danger. I shall
proceed to point out to you the several steps of the operation for tying
the femoral artery in cases of popliteal aneurism. Mr. Hunter used to
make the incision in the middle of the thigh, but experience has shown
that it is better to make it one-third of the space downwards from the
ilium to the internal condyle of the os femoris, because the artery is
more deeply seated in the middle of the thigh than it is higher up ; and
there are, besides, many anatomizing vessels in the former situation.
There are four steps in this operation : first, an incision through the
skin, which lays bare the sartorius muscle ; secondly, the division is to
be continued along the inner edge of the sartorius, exposing the sheath
of the femoral artery ; thirdly, the incision through the sheath ; and
fourthly, the putting of the ligature round the vessel. I now make the
incision, about four inches in length — [the learned professor proceeded
to perform the operation on the dead subject] — which completely ex- I
poses the sartorius muscle ; I then separate its inner edge from the i
parts with which it is in contact ; this lays bare the sheath, and I now I
find the femoral artery and the vein exposed. There is a little septum



%



OPERATION FOR POPLITEAL ANEURISM. 157

between the artery and the vein, which you should take care to observe.
Introduce the aneurismal needle under the artery, taking care to dis-
turb the parts as little as possible. Separate the cellular membrane to
the extent of about an inch ; and take care not to include the saphenus
nerve, which is a small branch of the anterior crural nerve, in the liga-
ture. If the saphenus nerve should be taken up, you will ascertain it
by the irritability which is immediately excited. Having brought the
ligature under the vessel with the aneurismal needle, all that remains is,
to tie it with what is called a surgeon’s knot, which does not slip. In
this consists the whole operation. If you should have separated the
artery from the sheath to any considerable extent, two ligatures will be
necessary, which must be applied close to the part where the vessel is
connected by the cellular tissue to the sheath ; but if you should not
have disturbed the artery, one ligature will be sufficient.



LECTURE XXI.

OPERATION FOR POPLITEAL ANEURISM.

As the time of last evening was occupied in performing the operation
for popliteal aneurism, I left one or two points unnoticed which it will
be important to bear in mind, therefore I will state them now. In the
first place, it has been conceived that considerable relief might be af-
forded in cases of aneurism, by medical treatment. It is natural to ex-
pect that if by any means the action of the heart and arteries be dimi-
nished, the result would be that the aneurismal bag would yield less,
and consequently be reduced : experience does not, however, justify
this conclusion. I will tell you a case which exemplifies the truth of
what I state. A gentleman came to town, and was operated on for
popliteal aneurism ; he recovered in the usual time, no untoward cir-
cumstance occurring during his recovery ; in twelve months afterwards,
he became afflicted with aneurism of the aorta, just at its curvature. He
came to, London, and having been under my care before, he applied to
me again. On examination I discovered the aneurism. A consultation
was held on this patient in July, when it was agreed that he should be
kept low, be occasionally bled, and be allowed small quantities only of
animal food, as it was hoped that by this means the action of the heart
and arteries would be considerably lessened. Well this regimen was
prescribed in July ; the patient adhered very rigidly to it ; but the Fe-
bruary following he died, from the bursting of the artery into the chest,
having lived a shorter period than usual in these cases. Now it is pro-
bable that he would have survived longer, had he been treated other-

p



158



OPERATION l'OR



wise ; and I will explain to you how it is that keeping the patients so
low does not agree with them ; by keeping them so low, the constitution
is rendered irritable, and then, whatever is lost in the momentum of the
circulating fluid, is gained in velocity. I have seen loss of blood in the
treatment of aneurisms occasionally useful. When the chest is affected,
and breathing laborious, it will be right to take blood ; and the best
state in which the body can be kept is a little below par ; that is, a
little under the natural state. Strict attention must be paid to regi-
men ; and it would be highly improper to give stimuli of any kind.

The second point is the chance of obtaining a cure by the application
of pressure on the artery or aneurismal bag. Very many years ago, I
had an iron ring made, with a pad on the outer side, and a screw on the
opposite : this was put on the limb, pressure on the outside was made
against the thigh, and on the inside against the artery ; the use of this
was worse than the operation. I applied it on a man at the other hos-
pital, and I will tell you how long he kept it on — twenty-four hours
only. In three hours from its first application he began to complain of
pain ; in a few hours afterwards it became worse ; and in less than
twenty-four hours the man said that he would submit to any operation
rather than suffer the pain : therefore it is impossible to practise it. 1
have tried the same experiment on the upper extremity, but without its
leading to any useful results. This plan of pressure on arteries does not
succeed, and therefore ought to be abandoned.

Well, gentlemen, I will describe the alterations which have taken
place in the mode of performing the operation for popliteal aneurism
since the time of Mr. J. Hunter. Mr. Hunter made the incision in the
middle of the thigh ; the spot where it is made at present is one-third
down, as in the middle of the thigh the artery is deeper situated ; well,
tiierefore, one-third down the thigh is the place where you ought to
operate. Now, Mr. Cline (with whom I formerly lived) thought that
it would be an improvement in the operation, if, instead of allowing the
ligature to remain till the process of ulceration had begun, he removed
it before that period, that hemorrhage might be prevented, and the
operation rendered simple ; and in the first case of popliteal aneurism
which he had after he thought of this plan he tried the experiment, laid
bare the artery, applied a broad ligature, and tied it firmly on the ar-
tery ; but in order to prevent the knot slipping, he put between it and
the vessel a small piece of cork. The first case on which he tried this
succeeded perfectly well. [Here the learned professor, pointing to a
specimen taken from the man on whom this experiment had been tried,
showed that the artery was quite obliterated.] The ligature remained
on till the adhesive process had begun ; but before ulceration hud taken



POPLITEAL ANEURISM.



J59



place, the wound suppurated, and ultimately closed. The patient died
some time after of an affection of the lungs ; and on examination of the
body, the artery was found as just described ; but on repeating this
mode of operation, it was soon ascertained that it produced more irrita-
tion than the other. Here is an example (pointing to a specimen), in
which the artery ulcerated a short time after the broad ligature had been
applied ; it led to great irritation, and the process of ulceration was
rendered more speedy ; therefore the operation cannot be performed ;
and Mr. Cline, with all the candour for which he is so remarkable, gave
it up, as an operation, however feasible, yet one that was attended with
considerable risk. Well, then, it has been proposed, and very inge-
niously, by Mr. Abernethy, that two ligatures should be applied, and
the artery divided between them. Now this idea arose from the circum-
stance, that where the ligatures are applied to arteries after limbs have
been removed, no hemorrhage comes on ; but the two cases essentially
differ : in the one, where amputation has been performed, retraction of
the artery, before the application of the ligature, has taken place ; it is
already drawn into the cellular tissue, and there is no danger of after
hemorrhage from its retracting any more : but in the other, where liga-
tures are applied on arteries for the cure of aneurisms, as soon as the
process of ulceration commences, hemorrhage often ensues from the re-
traction of the vessel, which had not taken place before. I had a case
in the other hospital, which was going on well to the fifteenth day, when,
as he was lying on the bed, a sudden rush of blood occurred, and had
there not been a dresser in the room at the time, he must have died :
ligatures were applied a second time. If an artery is whole when the
ligatures are applied, separate it from the cellular membrane sufficiently
to allow of retraction : but if the artery is divided, as after amputation,
there will be no occasion, as the vessel has already retracted before the
ligature is applied, and this is the reason that there is less danger from
hemorrhage when one ligature only is applied, than when there are two.
But this operation led to another dangerous consequence — there was the
danger of the slipping of the knot. Mr. Cline, senior, in the operation
for popliteal aneurism, put on two ligatures, and whilst the dresser was
sitting by the patient, hemorrhage came on ; the tourniquet was instantly
applied, and Mr. Cline sent for: when he came, on looking into the
wound, he saw one of the ligatures loose and floating in the blood. On
examination, he found that the ligature had escaped from the upper part
of the artery, and that the lower one had nearly slipped. lie imme-
diately applied two fresh ligatures. Therefore there is the danger of the
knot slipping where there are two ligatures used ; and on this account



160



OPERATION FOR



it has been recommended that a needle should be put through the artery,
with a fine ligature in it, as by this means the danger from hemorrhage
would be prevented. It was found by Dr. Jones, who has written an
excellent work on the methods nature adopts in restraining hemorrhage,
that if fine ligatures were applied on arteries, they would cut through
the internal coat, and leave the external undivided ; the elastic coat
would remain whole. He tried experiments on animals, and from these
he learnt that, when fine ligatures are applied, inflammation takes place,
and the adhesive process is, in a very short time, produced, by which
means the canal becomes obstructed ; he therefore recommended, that in
operation for aneurisms, fine ligatures should be applied, only for a few
hours, and then removed.

In consequence of this, I adopted the plan in the case from which I
took this specimen (pointing to one on the table), in order to see if it
would succeed ; it has been tried in the following cases, and is an opera-
tion that ought not to be performed. In the first place, a fine ligature
was put on the femoral artery, tied tightly, and in a few hours removed ;
the result of the operation was, that the pulsation was stopped for a short
time, but in a few hours it returned, and the size of the aneurism began
to increase. A consultation was held, and it was determined that a liga-
ture should be applied in the usual way, and allowed to suppurate and
ulcerate, and the patient did extremely well. In two other persons I
tried this plan : one for an aneurism on the popliteal artery, the other
for an aneurism on the radial artery : in the first case I used a fine thin
ligature, and tied it very tight ; in thirty hours I loosened it. Now,
when this man was on the table, I said to myself that the operation was
not founded on a right principle. I looked at the wound and saw that
the adhesive process had commenced, and that in drawing the ligature
out, I had destroyed all the adhesions which nature had set up : the pul-
sation had not ceased, and I pulled the ligature tight, and allowed it to
remain forty-two hours longer, and then removed it ; thus, after the
lapse of seventy-two hours in the whole, it did not return. Thirteen
days after this, as I was coming into the square of the other hospital,
one of my dressers said that hemorrhage had come on from the man in
Job’s ward, from whom the ligature had been removed, and that it was
evidently arterial. I said that this was exceedingly curious. I went up,
and found that it was the case ; a tourniquet was applied ; the hemor-
rhage did not return, and the patient did extremely well. If the ligature,
after being on for seventy-two hours, does not. produce adhesion, the
uselessness of temporary ligatures does not admit of a doubt — they
ought to be abandoned. In the aneurism of the radial artery, I removed



POPLITEAL ANEURISM.



If) I



the ligature twenty-four hours after it had been applied, but the pulsa-
tion returned ; I made an incision on the tumour, and applied a ligature
above and below, and the aneurism was cured.

It would be an extremely desirable thing if any person invented a
ligature composed of materials which would admit of solution : he
would, by such an invention, greatly serve his profession. It has been
said, that ligatures formed out of the untanned skins of kids will an-
swer such a purpose ; that they will become absorbed ; but they do
not, I understand, succeed. I thought that a ligature made of catgut
would admit of solution, and I tried it on a man of eighty years
of age, on whom I performed the operation for popliteal aneurism : the
catgut ligature was cut close to the vessel ; the wound healed over, and
no bad symptoms followed. The experiment succeeded, it is true, in
this case ; but I have used the catgut ligature in three other cases since,
and did not find it at all superior to the common ligature : in each of
the three cases it came away by suppuration and ulceration, as in com-
mon cases; it did not therefore succeed. In the old person there was
less tendency to inflammation, and that was the reason of it succeeding.
I made some experiments on dogs, with a view to ascertain the solubi-
lity of catgut. I tied the carotid of a dog, and used the catgut ligature ;
in a fortnight after I killed the animal, and found that the ligature had
not been dissolved, but that it had cut through the artery, and was situ-
ated in a cyst, like that which is formed round a ball, between the di-
vided ends of the vessel, in a quiescent state ; therefore this substance
does not admit of solubility, but will remain sometimes without pro-
ducing irritation. On the whole, catgut ligatures are not at all superior
to the common ones. Some animal matter of the form of gluten, made
into ligature, might do ; but this is mere conjecture. At present there
is no ligature known which is capable of being dissolved and removed by
the absorbents.

H ell, gentlemen, I have made all the observations respecting the im-
provements in the operation for popliteal aneurism that I intended, with
the exception of the plan of cutting the ligature close to the knot,
and then leaving it to its fate, and to come away as it can ; but expe-
rience shows that the irritation which is produced by this mode is at-
tended with great mischief. This is the plan Mr. Hunter adopted,
when he put the ligature for the first time on the femoral artery, in
operating for popliteal aneurism ; the wound closed kindly, and the liga-
ture afterwards came away by suppuration and ulceration. Since Mr.
Hunters time it has been tried again, but is now nearly given up by all
in the profession. On the whole, rest assured, that the best mode of ap-
plying the ligature is that now commonly adopted : tie a tight knot

r 2



162



OPERATION FOR



with a fine ligature, and then cut one end of the ligature close to the
vessel, and let the other hang out of the wound. If in the operation the
artery has been disturbed much from the surrounding cellular mem-
brane, for an inch or so, apply two ligatures, and divide the artery in the
centre, and there will be room for the retraction of the artery ; but if,
on the contrary, it has not been much disturbed, apply only the single
ligature ; broad ligatures must, however, on no account, be used, as
they are very likely to produce constitutional irritation, and consequently
cause the parts to suffer for a great length of time.

When the operation is performed, what you should do is this : you
are to bring the integuments close together by means of strips of adhe-
sive plaster, leaving, however, a small space between each, so that the
matter may escape through the insterstices. No bandage, or toller of
any sort, should be applied, as the blood-vessels of the limb would be
compressed by them, and injury be done to the part. As for the position
of the limb, it should be placed on a pillow, and on its outer side. If
the patient were to rest on his heel, two evils would be likely to arise ;
1st, there would be the necessity of supporting the knee by placing
something under the ham which would stop the circulation in the vessels
of the part ; and, 2dly, there is danger to be apprehended from gan-
grene, from the heel resting long in one position, as this is apt to pro-
duce sloughing of thd parts. The outer position, then, is the one you
should choose, occasionally changing it, so as to prevent pressure in any
one particular part.

Be on your guard, gentlemen, to preserve the warmth of the limb, for
there is danger from gangrene in cold weather. Some years ago, I was
very near losing a patient by not attending to this circumstance. A
young gentleman, on whom I had performed the operation for aneurism,
complained when I visited him (which was in the evening of the same
day) of a weight in the foot : this induced me to look at the limb, which
probably I should not otherwise have done, and I found that the foot
was quite cold and benumbed, which was occasioned by there being no
fire in the room at the time when the weather was quite cold. I sat
dpwn by the bed-side of the patient, and kept rubbing his leg and foot
with a warm flannel till heat was restored to the limb. Ever since that
time I have wrapped the limb up in a piece of flannel or a stocking, and
sometimes put jars filled with hot water to the feet, particularly if the
weather is cold, then the part will be preserved gently warm. I once saw
a patient lost by the folly of a dresser at the other hospital. In the
evening after the operation, seeing the limb a little swollen, he said to
the sister, “ Suppose you apply the white wash (liq. plumbi. super, and
water) to this ?” On the following morning gangrene came on, in conse-






POPLITEAL ANEURISM. 163

quence of the cold produced by the evaporation ; power of the circulation
i in the limb became destroyed, and the patient died.

The means by which the circulation is carried on when the femoral
; artery is tied is by the arteria profunda ; from this anastomosing vessels
! are sent off, which communicate with branches from the anterior tibial.

| It sometimes happens that the aneurism will be reproduced by means of
I a vessel which comes off above the part where the ligature is applied,
and enters the artery just above the aneurismal sac, and thus reproduce
| the aneurism. I scarcely should have mentioned this to you, if I had
j not seen an instance of this a short time ago, in a man at Guy’s, who
| had been operated on by Mr. Key for popliteal aneurism, and who was
j discharged cured. This person came back to the hospital with another
I swelling in the ham, and a pulsation in it, in the same spot as the former
I aneurism : he had suffered considerable pain ; the integuments of the
i knee were very rigid, and the bone, from the long-continued pressure on
it, had become in a diseased state. I amputated the limb, and found the
aneurism reproduced of the original size, and an artery could be dis.
tinctly traced going from a little above the tumour up the thigh. It
therefore happens that aneurisms are reproduced by means of arteries
I which proceed from above the spot where the ligature is applied, to just
I above the aneurismal sac : these cases are, however, extremely rare.

The time at which the ligature separates is generally from the twelfth
I to the fourteenth day ; the fourteenth day is generally the extreme.; the
twelfth day the minimum of separation ; but it is variable according to
: the different kinds of ligatures used. I have seen a ligature remain on
i as long as twenty-eight days, where a broad one had been used ; I have
i known a ligature come off as early as the fifth day, but in this last case
it was put on the brachial artery for a puncture made in bleeding; on
the eighth day it had come off, and no hemorrhage ensued ; there-
fore, if early inflammation ensues, the separation will be rapid ; but if
there be a broad ligature, and the inflammation indolent, it will be from
twenty-five to thirty days. Here let me give you one or two practical
hints. If the ligature comes away, and without any hemorrhage, you
will think the patient safe : he is not so by any means. A man was
pushing a knife through a cable, when it slipped, pierced the left thigh,
and wounded the femoral artery; a tourniquet was applied, the best
that could be made, for the accident happened on board a vessel in the
river ; he was brought to Guy’s Hospital, and I was sent for. On my
arrival, I found the knife had perforated the artery, and therefore ap-
plied a ligature above and below the vessel ; on the fourteenth day,
I they separated, about nine in the morning, I believe; about twelve he
began to wash and clean himself, and soon after a jet of blood took



164



ON THE TYING OF ARTERIES.



place. I. was sent for, applied other ligatures, and he was obliged to
keep his bed nearly as long as before, though I think the ligature*
separated a day or two sooner. When they separate, therefore, be
on your guard, and let the patient remain quiet two or three days
afterwards.

The operation which has been shown to you, gentlemen , for popliteal
aneurism, is the one used for aneurisms of the anterior and posterior
tibial arteries, situated at the upper part. I saw Mr. Lucas, the father
of Mr. Lucas, the late surgeon at Guy’s, perform that operation for
aneurism of the anterior tibial artery. But this operation is not to be
performed when the aneurism in these arteries is near the foot. I
have not seen an aueurism of the posterior tibial heliind the inner mal-
leolus, but I have of the anterior tibial on the front of the foot. I saw
Mr. H. Cline, in an aneurism of the anterior tibial, cut down on the
tumour, and apply a ligature just above it, but it did not succeed. In
these aneurisms you must make an incision on the sac, and apply a liga-
ture both above and below it.



LECTURE XXII.

ON THE TYING OF ARTE R I ES.

We are, this evening, gentlemen, to consider the subject of the taking
up of the arteries in the different parts of the body, for aneurism.

THE APPLICATION OF A LIGATURE ON THE EXTERNAL ILIAC

ARTERY.

It is not at all an uncommon occurrence to meet with an aneurism of
the femoral artery just below Poupart’s ligament, of which here is a
specimen (pointing to one on the table), exactly similar to the aneu-
risms which occur in the ham. Now, with respect to recurring to the
operation in this complaint, I have performed it in nine different in-
stances for aneurism of the femoral artery ; one of those persons was a
surgeon, who has since married, and is extremely well. The mode in
which the operation is performed is as follows: — [There was a subject
on the table during the whole of the lecture, on which the learned pro -
fessor showed each operation.] I do not make a straight incision in
the course of the artery, but one of a semilunar form. I begin the in-
cision a little above the abdominal ring, and extend it, in the shape of a
crescent, to the edge of Poupart’s ligament, and then continue it to
about an inch and a half from the inner side of the spine of the ilium,
where it terminates. By this incision I lay bare the tendon of the



165



0

ON THE TYING OF ARTERIES.

oblique muscle ; in the second I divide this tendon, and expose the in-
ternal oblique and transversalis muscles. Having arrived at this step
of the operation, there will be no occasion to make any further use of
the knife. The next step will be to raise the internal oblique and trans-
versalis muscles from Poupart’s ligament, by introducing the finger
behind them. Well, having done this, you reach the passage of the
spermatic cord, and you feel it distinctly ; and then behind this the
pulsation of the iliac vessel. You now draw up the internal oblique
and transversalis muscles with the finger, at the same time elevating the
spermatic cord a little, and then carry the finger into the abdomen, be-
hind the peritoneum, and you ascertain the beating of the iliac artery.
Having found the artery, I put the aneurismal needle in to the opening,
and introduce it under the vessel. You will recollect that the artery is
accompanied by a vein, and that the vein is on the inner side ; the
artery on the iliac, the vein on the pubic side ; the operation may be
performed without the least difficulty, and is as easy as tying the
femoral artery ; there is only one circumstance that occasions the least
danger ; and that is the epigastric artery passes up from the pubic side
of the iliac vessel, and on the inner side of the incision; but this, how-
ever, may be avoided. I will clean the artery a little from the surround-
ing parts, and take it up ; it is very desirable to ascertain that the vein
is not secured, because the interruption to the return of blood would be
very injurious ; if the artery should be exposed as much as it is on the
subjdct before me (an inch and a half), two ligatures must be em-
ployed, but if a small portion only of the vessel is laid bare, a single
ligature will be all that is required. When you use two ligatures, you
will separate them from each other, drawing one upward, and the other
downward, and leaving about three-quarters of an inch of the vessel
exposed at the extremity of each ligature ; for if this be not done, on
dividing the artery, there will be danger of the ligature slipping off ; the
instrument with which the artery is usually divided is the probe-pointed
bistoury ; when it is done, retraction of the vessel immediately takes
place ; there will be no danger of including the nerve in the ligature, as
the anterior crural does not accompany it ; the vein and artery are in-
cluded in the sheath, and the nerve is on the outer side. Now the edges
of the wound are to be brought together, strips of adhesive plaster are
to be applied, and the ligatures are to be allowed to come away by sup-
puration and ulceration.

Here is a curious specimen (exhibiting a preparation), showing the
mode in which the circulation is carried on after the external iliac has
been tied ; the limb has been injected, and the anastomosing vessels
are distinct ; you also see the part of the iliac artery where it was tiedi



166



ON THE TYING OF ARTERIES.



If, then, you were asked what carries on the circulation after the exter-
nal iliac has been tied, your answer would be — the gluteal principally :
this passes out through the ischiatic notch, comes over the ilium to the
groin, and enters the femoral artery, a little below Poupart’s ligament ;
the second artery is the ischiatic, it arises from the termination of the
internal iliac, passes out of the pelvis between the trochanter major
and tuberosity of the ischium to the back of the thigh, and sends a few
branches to the arteria profunda and external circumflex arteries ; the
third artery is the obturator, it passes out through the obturator fora-
men, and joins the internal circumflex artery; also the external pubic
communicates freely with the internal pubic; therefore, if asked by
what vessels the circulation is carried on after the external iliac has
been tied, you would say, principally by the glutseal.

OS SECURIN& THE INTERNAL ILIAC ARTERY.

An operation of extraordinary difflculty ; it has been performed by
Mr. Stevenson, of the West Indies, and since by two other individuals,
one of whom was Mr. Atkinson, of York, for the purpose of securing
the internal iliac artery. None but a man endowed with the knowledge
which Mr. Stevenson possessed would have dared to undertake such an
operation ; but Mr. Stevenson was educated by Mr. Burns, of Glasgow,
an enterprising man, and a most excellent anatomist. He was brought
up in his dissecting-room, and this it was led Mr. Stevenson to the
idea of doing it. The operation consists of making an incision on the
inner side of the spine of the ilium, by which you cut through the ab-
dominal muscles, and reach the peritoneum, which you turn to the
opposite side, in order that the artery may be reached. Now, in this
operation there is considerable difficulty in separating the ureter from
the artery, because it crosses just at the bifurcation of the iliac artery,
and if a man had not been well acquainted with the anatomy of the
part, as Mr. Stevenson was, he might include the ureter in the ligature,
and thus cause destruction of life. I put the ligature round the artery
(the learned professor continued showing the operation on the dead
body), that you may see it is the internal iliac which I have secured ; I
would not, however, have ventured to perform this operation, if it had
not been performed by another ; I should have doubted my own powers
and skill. It is an operation highly creditable to any one who performs
it, but particularly to him who first attempted it. In what case, then,
would a surgeon be called op to perform this operation ? Why, for an
aneurism of the glutroal artery, just at its commencement, so that it can-
not be reached under the glutaml muscle; the operation must be' per-
formed in the manner l have just shown you,



ON THE TYING OF ARTERIES.



167



TYING THE AORTA.

1 was sent for one day to go to the other hospital to see a man with
violent bleeding from just above the groin, in consequence of a rupture
of the external iliac vessel high up ; the man had long been a patient
there ; the integuments had sloughed, and the patient was exceedingly
reduced from loss of blood. Under these circumstances, I thought my-
self justified in performing the operation of tying the aorta ; for this
step I have been greatly abused, but abuse, gentlemen, does no injury;
it shows a malicious and bad disposition on the part of those from
whom it proceeds, and on a man possessing the mens conscia recti it
will have no effect, unless he be destitute of common sense. I was
situated as I have just described when I tied the aorta; I knew that the
aorta had been obliterated within the chest, and that the circulation had
been carried on by the intercostal arteries going from above to just below
the spot where the aorta was obliterated : the insides of the ribs are co-
vered with numerous vessels. A gentleman of Dublin had a prepara-
tion, in which the aorta had been obliterated in the abdomen ; and in this
case the circulation was carried on by the lumbar arteries going from
above to below the part where the vessel was obliterated : I had not the
least doubt but that if the aorta was obliterated, anastomosing vessels
would carry on the circulation, on the same principle as in any other part
of the body ; the greatest danger is not from gangrene when the ligature
is applied on the aorta, nor is any thing to be apprehended as far as re-
gards the carrying on of the circulation, but the danger consists in in-
cluding the nerves, as I will presently show you.

Here is a specimen of a dog (pointing to one on the table), in which
the aorta had been tied, and the circulation was carried on by the lum-
bar arteries ; it is a very easy operation on the dog, and any one may
perform it. I will tell you how you should do it ; you must make an
incision on the side of the transverse processes of the lumbar vertebrae,
cut through the muscles and peritoneum, and then you may easily carry
the aneurismal needle under the vessel, and bring it out of the wound, in
order that you may see that you have not included the aortic plexus: if
this be secured in the ligature, a paralytic affection of the lower extre-
mities will be produced : now I wish particularly to state this, as I be-
lieve it to be entirely new, and that nothing new has been said on this
subject in books. In the first two animals on which 1 performed this
operation, I thought the paralysis was owing to the interruption of the
circulation, but on repeating the experiment, I found it was produced
by including the aortic plexus. If the aorta be well cleaned, and a
ligature applied, and the vessel be returned to the abdomen, the dog



168



ON THE TYING OF ARTERIES.



runs about as if nothing had been done to it ; and in five minutes
after, it will eat bread out of your bands, if it has been previously
accustomed to it. The operation, I repeat, is exceedingly easy,
and a boy may perform it. Well, after you have done this, wait a short
time, kill the animal, and inject the arteries, you will find that the lum-
bar vessels on the inner side of the abdomen, and fore part of the spine,
had carried on the circulation. The reason of the paralysis in the case
I have just alluded to, was, that the aortic plexus was included, and
the result was the destruction of life. Unfortunately, however, in the
human subject you cannot make your incision near the spine, but must
do it on the fore part of the abdomen to get at the aorta. If a case were
to offer itself, similar to that I have told you of, I would immediately
perform the operation again ; and my own conviction is, that it can be
done, and with success. At the time I tied the aorta, the patient ap-
peared dying ; after the operation had been performed, I was pleased in
a remarkable manner, to see him in the evening sitting up in bed
adjusting his clothes; if the vessel had not been secured when it was,
he would not have lived an hour. On the following morning signs of
constitutional irritation came on, in the evening he became much worse,
and in forty hours from the time of the operation he died. Here is a
specimen, (the learned professor exhibited the aorta, which he tied,) in
which you see a coagulum above and below the spot where the ligature
was applied, sealing the extremities of the artery. Now, gentlemen, if
1 should perform this operation again, the only difference that I would
make, would be to cut the ligature close to the vessel, where it should
take its chance, either to become encysted or absorbed. I commenced
the incision in this operation in the linea alba, two inches above the
umbilicus, and carried it to the same distance below, taking care, in my
descent, to avoid the umbilicus, by giving it a semilunar turn or curve.
I was astonished to find with what ease I could pass my finger down to
the artery. However great the apparent difficulty of performing this
operation, there was in reality none. The principal danger appeared to
arise from the irritation produced in the intestines by the ligature, and
that is the reason why I should cut the ligature close to the vessel.
Time wall show us whether this operation will be successful or not. I
know, for my own part, that I would not hesitate to have my own aorta
tied, if it would save my life for forty hours.

TYING THE SUBCLAVIAN ARTERY.

The middle of your incision should be opposite to the external jugu-
lar vein, and centre of the clavicle. Speaking anatomically, the view of
the parts exposed in this operation may be thus described (Sir Astley



ON THE TYING OF ARTERIES.



169



exhibited them) : here you see the omo-hyoideus muscle crossing ob-
liquely above the clavicle, below the sterno-cleido-mastoideus upon the
inner side, and the jugular vein passing immediately opposite to the
centre of the opening. Mr. Key informs me that in the operation which
he performed at the other hospital for securing this vessel, that it was
much facilitated by a free division of the clavicular portion of the sterno-
cleido-mastoideus, and that after having done so, he was enabled, with
a common aneurismal needle, to introduce the ligature under the vessel.
Soon after commencing this operation, you meet with branches of nerves
from the axillary plexus — you must carefully avoid including these in
the ligature ; for it would be a fatal error if you were to tie them. The
scalenus anticus being the boundary of the artery on the inner side, you
cut down for the purpose of finding its inner edge ; this you will find a
useful guide.

I have lately heard a person say, but do not know upon what autho-
rity, that the operation for tying the subclavian artery has been success-
ful, but upon one side only. The first person who succeeded in this
operation was Dr. Post, of Philadelphia; he is no post (a laugh),
though his name is Post, but an exceedingly clever, industrious surgeon.
Since this gentleman, several others have performed it, and the results
favourable — a gentleman of the name of Liston is one — Mr. Bullen, of
Lynn, in Norfolk, another — and you have lately seen a very successful
one in the other hospital.

Mr. Keate, sen., the uncle of the present Mr. R. Keate, performed the
operation below the clavicle, and the first time he did so it was completely
successful ; there may happen cases of axillary aneurism when the
operation below the clavicle would be the best and safest, but unques-
tionably in ordinary instances that which I first described, viz. the one
above the clavicle, is by far the most preferable. If, gentlemen, you
were asked what artery chiefly supported the 'circulation after the sub-
clavian had been tied, yoitr answer would be the superior scapula. The
late Mr. I aunton, lecturer on anatomy, had in his possession an excel-
lent specimen of natural obliteration of the subclavian artery, and in
this example the superior scapular had become very much enlarged.



TYING THE BRACHIAL ARTERY.

This artery very seldom requires to be secured in consequence of
aneurism ; but it is often rendered necessary from other causes, such as
wounds, and some of these wounds indeed, as in bleeding, give rise to
aneurism. \\ hen an aneurismal tumour at the bend of the arm has
been thus formed, let me recommend you not to cut down upon it in
order to secure the vessel ; rather tie the brachial artery at the middle



Q



170



ON THE TYING OF ARTERIES.



of the arm, and not make an incision upon the swelling, at the middle
of the elbow. To put a ligature upon the vessel here, amidst a mass of
extravasated blood, is tedious, difficult, and dangerous. A young gen-
tleman in the hospital bled a man, and in doing so penetrated the radial
artery : thirty -seven ounces of blood were lost before he could succeed
in stopping it ; in three days the pressure caused so much pain that the
man requested it to be lightened ; this was done, and the bleeding re-
turned ; at the end of the week one of the surgeons deemed it prudent to
secure the vessel, and he did so at the part where the wound had been
made ; the operation took an hour in performing, and it was excessively
difficult to find the vessel. On the following day there were much irri-
tation and inflammation, and on the tenth day from the accident he died.
When I was with Mr. Cline, about forty years ago, one of my fellow-
apprentices came up to me in a great fright, and said, “ Lord ! Cooper,
what do you think I have done ? ” “ Something very bad, surely,”

replied I, “ or you would not look so pale.” — “ Why, I have just been
bleeding a man, and in doing so have punctured his radial artery.”
“ Well,” I said, “ is he in the hospital ? ” — “ Oh, no, I have taken
care of that, I bound up his arm as tightly as I could, and sent him
away.” In two or three days this man came back, and showed his arm
to the surgeon, who, very properly, upon seeing what was the matter,
made light of it, told him that a trifling operation must be performed, and
in a few days he would be quite well. The man, upon hearing that he
was tube again cut, would not consent, and left the hospital. As he was
walking up Holbom, he happened to see the shop of a barber-surgeon,
and in he went ; this learned gentleman, after having inspected the
tumour, said that he would soon give him relief by letting out the mat-
ter with his lancet; well, he thrust in the instrument, and the moment
lie did so, out gushed a quantity of arterial blood ; this so frightened
the barber, that he rushed out of his shop, and left the poor patient
to manage for himself ; fortunately some person happened to be in the
way, who bound up his arm, and brought him to the hospital ; one of
the surgeons put a ligature upon the artery, and the man ultimately did
well.

In tying the brachial artery, there is only one circumstance of any
importance to bear in mind, and it is this: the vessel is accompanied by
the median nerve; now, if you should include this in the ligature, it
would either destroy the patient’s life or cause paralysis of the limb.
When you are about to secure the brachial artery, the direction for the
incision is the inner edge of the biceps muscle, and this cut almost im-
mediately lays bare the median nerve.



ON THE TYING OF ARTERIES.



171



TYING- THE ULNAR ARTERY.

When this artery is required to be secured, what is the anatomical
direction for the incision ? Why the tendon of the flexor carpi ulnaris ••
if you make your cut upon the inner side of this tendon, you will directly
perceive the ulnar artery and ulnar nerve. This then is the part where
the vessel may be most easily and safely tied.

TYING THE RADIAL ARTERY.

What is the anatomical direction here ? — the answer is, the tendon of
the flexor carpiradialis — cut upon the radial side of the tendon, and you
will immediately find the artery close to its edge. Instead of putting
ligatures upon these vessels at the wrist for aneurism, or wounds of the
palmar arch, it has been recommended to employ pressure, by means of
cork folded in lint, and bound down by a bandage. This practice,
when used, leads to great inflammation and irritation — and I would
advise you against using pressure generally, and more especially as re-
gards the ulnar and radial arteries, as they can be so easily tied if you
possess the least anatomical knowledge ; and if you do not know
anatomy you had better never touch the body at all.

TYING THE CAROTID ARTERY.

When this vessel is to be secured, it is desirable to make the incision
as high as you can ; the upper boundary, therefore, will be the angle of
the jaw, and below the omo-hyoideus : make your incision first, then,
high up, on the inner side of the sterno-cleido-mastoideus ; upon draw-
ing aside the edge of which you will distinctly see the omo-hyoideus
obliquely crossing the artery. (Sir Astley here exhibited it in the dead
body.) I have laid bare the carotid, and will now show you what you
must principally take care to avoid in this operation, viz. the par-vagum,
which accompanies the artery ; if you were to tie this nerve you would
endanger life ; well then, when you are about to pass the ligature round
the vessel, if you raise it a little, you can readily discover whether the
nerve be in contact with it, and thus guard against an accident which
might lead to a fatal result.

I will now conclude the lecture by saying a few words on aneurisms
from arteries of the scalp. The first case of this kind that I saw was
sent to me by Mr. Toulmin, of Hackney : in this instance I tied the
artery proceeding to, and from, the tumour. If the aneurismal bag be
not very large, you may cut immediately across it ; apply a piece of
doubled lint, then adhesive plaster, and over the whole a roller. If the
swelling is small, that is, not larger than a walnut, adopt another mode.



172



ON HYDROCELE.



which is to make a circular incision completely down to the occipito-
frontalis tendon. In this manner the connexion between the blood-ves-
sels and the aneurism is destroyed ; and, by applying a dossil of lint and
strips of adhesive plaster, you speedily succeed in getting rid of the dis-
ease. I saw a case of aneurism of the posterior aural artery, and, for
its cure, tied all the vessels which were leading to and from it. I should
have done better, by making, round the tumour, the circular incision
that I have just described.



LECTURE XXIII.

ON HYDROCELE.

Hydrocele is an accumulation of water in the tunica vaginalis tes-
tis ; the anatomy, therefore, of those persons who say that the fluid is
contained between the tunica albuginea and the tunica vaginalis is ex-
ceedingly faulty. Such a description is entirely false ; and I scarcely
need tell you , gentlemen, that the water is completely enclosed in the
cavity of the tunica vaginalis. If the question was put to you, where
is the water situated in hydrocele ? the answer would be what I have
just stated ; and if you gave any other, it would be directly perceived
that your knowledge of the anatomy of the part was but imperfect. The
situation of the water in hydrocele is precisely similar to water in the
pericardium ; and what should we say of the man who would assert
that this water was contained between the pericardium and heart ?
\Yhy, gentlemen, we should feel assured that he was entirely ignorant
of the matter, for water in the pericardium is situated distinctly within
it : and so is water in hydrocele completely within the tunica vaginalis.

Hydrocele is a generic term, and a multitude of tumours have re-
ceived this appellation. It is now, however, usually confined to two ;
I should, therefore, say that hydrocele is of two kinds, viz. 1st, of the
tunica vaginalis ; and, 2d, of the spermatic cord.

HYDROCELE OF THE TUNICA VAGINALIS.

Well, then, of hydrocele in the tunica vaginalis. The swelling at
first shows itself at the lower part of the testicle, and gradually rises till
it arrives at the abdominal ring ; is of a pyriform shape ; largest two-
thirds of the way downwards ; a little less at the bottom : and smallest
at the ring. The common formation of hydrocele is unattended with
pain, excepting, however, in those cases where it has been the result of
inflammation ; but, generally speaking, there is no pain, and the patient
accidentally discovers tbe existence of the swelling, and often not until it



ON HYDROCELE. 1 7*3

lias arrived at considerable magnitude. Commonly there is no redness
of the scrotum — no discoloration.

The ordinary situation of the testicle in hydrocele is two-thirds of the
way down the tumour, at the posterior part. Here, I say, is its usual
situation ; but in this respect it sometimes varies, as I shall presently
show you. In performing the operation for hydrocele, it is of the utmost
importance that you should have an exact knowledge of the situation
of the testicle, for ignorance in this respect has often led to its being
pierced by the trocar. You can easily discover the position of the tes-
ticle, by a careful examination of the swelling, and by squeezing it with
some degree of force at every part. When you press upon the testicle,
you will find that part of the tumour more firm ; the patient will mani-
fest much uneasiness, and complain that you give him a good deal of
pain; in this manner, then, you can readily discover where it is situated.
The weight of the tumour is but little (this of course means compara-
tively) ; when you lift it, you will be astonished at its lightness, which
will at once convince you that it is not a solid substance. The next
thing you notice is, if the part be not very much distended, that the
swelling will be moveable, i. e., if you firmly grasp it at its base, the
fluid will ascend, and the tumour increase at its upper part ; therefore,
its lightness, mobility, form, freeness from pain, and the history of the
case, constitute its distinguishing characters from other diseases. But
there are two other marks by which the disease may be known, one of
them decisive, and the other nearly so : these are, first, its sense of
fluctuation; and, second, its transparency. I have just told you, that
if you press upon the lower part of the swelling, it would decrease there
and increase at the upper part ; fluctuation at this time becomes evident
to those who are accustomed to such examinations. Its transparency, or
rather its semi-transparency may be discovered in the manner I shall
presently explain to you. This characteristic feature has been denied ;
I have certainly seen the tunica vaginalis so much thickened in very old
cases of hydrocele, and in persons who had long resided in hot climates,
that the examination required nicety and caution ; but still a little art,
as I shall presently explain to you, will enable the surgeon to form a
correct diagnosis.

Well, then, such are the common marks by which you distinguish
hydrocele ; but there are other varieties, and these I will mention to you :
first, the water of hydrocele sometimes forms two swellings. 1 have be-
fore told you that the shape of the tumour is usually pyriform, and that
the water gradually rises till it arrives at the abdominal ring ; now, in
this variety of two swellings, a portion of the water collects above the
r ' n 8> giving rise to a tumour there ; thus a swelling is formed above

« 2



174



ON HYDROCELE.



and below, the narrowest part being at the ring. A surgeon unacquainted
with this circumstance, upon looking at such a case would say, “ Oh !
this is not hydrocele, but hernia,” and he would be strengthened in that
opinion by seeing the upper part dilate upon coughing, in consequence
of the impulse that it would receive from the contraction of the abdo-
minal muscles. Its transparency and lightness, however, would readily
enable him to distinguish this complaint from hernia. Why, this very
day, a gentleman came to me under the following circumstances : when he
came into my room, he informed me that he had been twice tapped, and
that he did not think the operations had been well performed : I looked
at the swelling, and found that it extended to the abdominal ring ; I exa-
mined the part very carefully, and requested him to cough ; the moment
he did so, the swelling was evidently forced down ; well, said I, this
may be hydrocele, but I shall not tap you ; I requested a candle to be
brought ; no transparency was observable ; I desired him to lie down
upon the chairs, when I found it to be hernia, and reduced it. This,
then, shows how cautious we ought to be in such cases, before we in-
troduce the trocar, for I might have been misled by the history of this
case, and proceeded at once to have performed the operation of tapping:
had 1 done so, in all probability, the trocar would have passed into this
gentleman’s intestines. It was a hernia which had succeeded hydrocele.

Another variety met with, is that in which a fluctuating swelling will
remain, after a considerable portion of water has been removed. The
first case of this kind that I saw was sent to me by Dr. Chester, and
Mr. Roberts, of Gloucester. The patient had been under the care of
those gentlemen, and had been tapped for hydrocele : a quantity of
water was drawn off - , but still a swelling remained. He was sent to
town for me to see him, at which time the hydrocele had become nearly
as large as before. Upon hearing the history of this case, the impres-
sion upon my mind was, that when the operation for tapping had been
performed, the operator had let the canula slip out of the tunica vagi-
nalis, which circumstance, I thought, led to the retention of a portion of
tiie fluid. Well, believing this, I passed in the trocar and canula my-
self; some water came away, but not all; this struck me as being very
strange, for I had taken great care to keep the end of the canula within
the tunica vaginalis. I examined the remaining swelling ; found fluc-
tuation ; then tried it with a candle, and saw that it was transparent.
Well, sir, I said, this is water now, introduced the trocar again, a little
way from where I did at first, and off it ran. The fluid, in the second
instance, had nothing of the yellow appearance of that which is drawn
off in hydrocele, but, on the contrary, was as clear as water.

I have before mentioned to you, that the testicle in hydrocele is com-



ON HYDROCELE.



17 »



monly situated at the back part, and two-thirds of the way downwards.
Here, however, there is great variety, and it is even sometimes found in
front. I will tell you how this happens. The person is attacked with
inflammation in the tunica vaginalis, before any collection of water has
taken place ; adhesive matter is thrown out, probably at the fore part,
which occasions permanent adhesion between the middle and outer coat
of the testicle: should serum be secreted after this, of course it would
be lodged at the sides and posterior part. What would the consequence
be, if, in such a case as this, the trocar were to be introduced in the
usual situation? Why, that it would pass into the testicle. A gentleman
of great importance in this town consulted his regimental surgeon for a
swelling in the scrotum ; it was pronounced hydrocele. The operation
of tapping was resolved upon ; but when the trocar was introduced, it
passed only into a solid substance, and no water came away. The sur-
geon stared, and said, “ Sir, I am a little mistaken in this case ; you
have a diseased testicle here, instead of hydrocele, as I at first supposed,
and it is necessary that the diseased part should be removed.” But the
gentleman, being a young man, did not think it would add much to his
enjoyment to lose a testicle — ( loud laughter ) — and thought that it re-
quired some hesitation before he resolved upon such a measure ; conse-
quently he did hesitate, and the result was, that he consulted another
surgeon. Upon examination, the testicle was found at the fore part of
the swelling, and the fluid at the sides and bottom. Whilst taking off
his clothes, some copper-coloured eruptions having been seen, he was
asked if there was any enlargement of the bones ; when the right tibia
was found considerably swollen. He was put under a course of mercury,
for these secondary symptoms, which soon got well. The hydrocele
still remained, and as the surgeon who first saw this case was right in
his first opinion as to its nature, he was sent for to repeat the operation
of tapping. He now introduced the trocar at the side of the swelling,
instead of the fore part; the water was withdrawn, and the patient
perfectly recovered. This case shows the necessity of extreme cau-
tion in determining the situation of the testicle before the introduction
of the trocar.

The testicle is sometimes found at the bottom of the swelling. Now
(holding up a preparation), here is a curious thing. This hydrocele,
you observe, was situated between the testicle and abdominal ring, the
testicle being quite at the inferior extremity of the tumour. Adhesive
inflammation, in this instance, had completely united the middle to
the outer coat; consequently, the descent of the water had been
prevented.



176



ON HYDROCELE.



Here is another preparation, in which the water had collected at the
sides, adhesion having taken place both before and behind.

Here is another preparation, in which it appears as though the
hydrocelic sac had arisen from the tunica vaginalis, in the same manner
as an aneurismal sac is occasionally formed from the coats of an
artery.

In hydrocele, it sometimes happens that the fluid is formed in a
distinct bag or cyst, between the tunica vaginalis and tunica albuginea;
this complaint is usually combined with common hydrocele.

There are great varieties with regard to the state of the tunica
vaginalis; and it is found much thicker in those persons who have for
a long time resided in hot climates, such as the coast of Africa, or
West Indies, than in such a climate as our own. When, therefore,
you find a tumour about the testicle, apparently solid, but of little
weight, you are to be very cautious in your diagnosis; you are somewhat
called upon to explore the swelling with a lancet; that is, puncture it
lightly where there is the most appearance of fluctuation ; and often,
when least expected, the testicle will be found in a healthy state.

After the water has been discharged, it frequently happens that the
tunica vaginalis, in consequence of its extreme thickness, will remain
in large folds.

The tunica vaginalis has, in a few instances, been found ossified.
Mr. Warner, formerly surgeon at Guy’s, met with an example of this.
There is a similar preparation in the museum at the other hospital,
which any of you might see by applying to Mr. Stocker. Mr. Beaver,
formerly a student here, accidentally discovered a case of it in our
dissecting-room.

Then, with regard to the contents of hydrocele, it is usually yellow
serum. But sometimes small cartilaginous bodies are found in the
fluid; when these are seen, they prove that the hydrocele had existed
for a very long time, and are always proof of its age.

There is another variety which I ought to mention here; it has been
called the congenital hydrocele , in consequence of a communication
having from birth existed between the tunica vaginalis and cavity of
the abdomen. When the parts are natural and perfect, there is no
opening leading from one to the other, as you know ; but occasionally
the natural closure does not take place, and then a fluid may descend from
the abdomen, and collect in the . tunica vaginalis. In this manner,
sometimes from ascites, the scrotum will become greatly distended;
and here, in such cases, is the best situation for tapping. The hydrocele
of which I am now speaking may be readily discovered from any other.



ON HYDROCELE.



177



in consequence of your being enabled, with ease, to return the water
into the cavity of the abdomen : this you can effect by placing the
person upon his back, and then elevating the scrotum. The first case
of this variety of hydrocele that I saw was sent to me by Mr. Dobson,
of Harrow. The patient being a very young person, I was apprehensive
of peritoneal inflammation, if I injected ; it occurred to me that I might
succeed in shutting up the communication with the abdomen by means
of a common truss, when I might afterwards safely tap and inject for
the radical cure. A truss was accordingly applied over the ring, and
ordered to be worn for two years ; at the end of one year Mr. Dobson
wrote to me to say that the lad was quite cured. Now this I did not
expect. What had happened was this : the pressure of the truss had
succeeded in destroying the communication between the tunica vaginalis
and abdomen, and then the water had become absorbed. I advise you,
should you ever meet with such a case, to pursue a similar practice ;
for, as you see in this case, the opening which exists may be closed,
and if the person’s health be good, the water may be absorbed, thereby
rendering an operation unnecessary. The result of that case gratified
me exceedingly.

Diagnosis . — Now then as to the best mode of distinguishing hydro-
cele : When a patient comes to you with a fluctuating swelling in the
scrotum, in which the testicle is enclosed, you order a candle to be
brought ; then squeezing the tumour at the posterior part, you distend
the front so as to make it tense ; apply the skin of the little finger, and
that covering its metacarpal bone at the outer side, to the surface of the
tumour, and then cause the candle to be held as close as possible
opposite to where the two skins meet. In this way you will never fail
to discover the transparency of hydroceles which are formed in this
climate; and it is only the clumsy, awkward mode in which the
experiment is made, that occasions any person to be unsuccessful in it,
which, if conducted differently, would lead to a satisfactory result.
I have seen individuals, however, from Sierra Leone and the West
Indies, in whom the tunica vaginalis had become so much thicken edfas
to render the hydrocele perfectly opaque.

Diseased testicle may be easily distinguished from hydrocele by its
weight and flatness, and the pain and sickness which it occasions ; and
often by the discoloration of the skin covering it, and by the semi-
transparency and lightness of one tumour and the heaviness of the
other.

There is one disease somewhat difficult to distinguish from hydro-
cele, viz., hamatoccle : this is a collection of blood in the tunica
vaginalis testis, and produces in form an exactly similar tumour to



178



ON HYDROCELE.



hydrocele; but the history of the case is quite different, and your best
guide. If you ask how it happened ? the answer is — “ Why I was
riding, when the horse, became restive, began to plunge, and threw me
forward on the pommel of the saddle ; 1 soon afterwards discovered
this swelling.” Then, if you inquire whether there were any marks or
bruises in the skin of the scrotum, the answer will be, “ Oh, yes ; it
was black and blue.” Whenever you find a swelling thus suddenly
formed after a blow, having the figure of hydrocele, you may be certain
of its being blood. But, gentlemen, guard against mistaking this
complaint for diseased testicle. I was once present in the other hospital
when a healthy testicle was removed, owing to this error ; and some
years since, one of the first surgeons in this town, after having removed
a tumour from the scrotum ; and when the gentlemen were leaving the
theatre, desired them to wait a moment, and he would show them the
disease of the testicle. However, upon cutting the part open, the great
bulk proved to be blood, and the testicle was in a perfectly sound state.
Such an unfortunate occurrence as this a man must for ever lament.

The cause of hydrocele appears to depend upon increased secretion,
as the vessels are dilated, though there is generally no inflammatory
action.

Inflammation of the testicle will give rise to hydrocele ; for as the
inflammation disappears, hydrocele forms. This can generally be re-
moved by exciting absorption ; for which purpose give the pil. hydrarg.
submur. comp., and apply to the scrotum a lotion composed of liq. am-
mon. acet., having dissolved in it some of the amrnon. mur. These
means will be found to have considerable influence in this hydrocele,
which results from inflammation ; but in the other they have none.

Hydrocele, if left to itself, will often undergo spontaneous cure. A
man was brought into the other hospital with a sloughing of the
scrotum, in consequence of an inflammation occasioned by a hydrocele;
the water, was, in this case, discharged by a natural process, and
nature performed a Tadical cure by effecting a permanent adhesion of
tile parts.

I shall conclude this lecture by describing to you the palliative
treatment of hydrocele, reserving what I have to say on the radical or
curative treatment until we next meet.

When persons are afraid of the curative treatment, or when it would
be attended with inconvenience, as also in old people, the palliative will
be demanded. It is a very simple operation, and one which any person
can perform. Remember that the testicle is usually two-thirds of the
way downwards at the posterior part; introduce, therefore, the trocar
in the fore part obliquely upwards, indeed almost perpendicularly, to



ON HYDROCELE.



179



avoid wounding the testicle; but as I have before shown you that the
testicle occupies different situations in the tumour, you cannot introduce
the trocar with safety until you have ascertained the precise spot where
the testicle is lodged, and then you will of course take care to avoid it.
Let me observe, that whether you perform the operation for the pal.
liative or curative treatment, withdraw the trocar the instant you believe
that the canula is within the tunica vaginalis : and once having the
trocar in, take care to keep it there until the operation be concluded ;
and the most effectual way to do this is by grasping the tumour at the
posterior part, so as to keep it tense where the trocar entered. I gene-
rally use a trocar and canula of small size. Some persons recommend
a lancet and probe to be employed; it is mere nonsense : if they had
ever performed the operation, they would not do so. Such suggestions
can only emanate from people who are destitute of experience and
knowledge.

If you wish to accomplish this operation bloodlessly, to prevent in-
ternal bleeding, and the formation of haematocele, keep the patient, at the
time you are doing it, in the erect position. There is no necessity
for any after application ; on the following day the wound will be
well.

It requires repetition in proportion to the dropsical tendency existing
in the person. In some it will be necessary once a month ; in others,
once in three months ; but, generally speaking, the usual time is every
six months.

Insignificant as this operation appears, it has been known to cause
the destruction of life. Two instances are within my own knowledge.
One of the cases was operated upon by Mr. Green, who resides a few
miles from town, and the other by myself. Mr. Green's case was
published in the journals, therefore I need not scruple to mention it;

I but Mr. Green possesses too much manliness to regard a notice of an
unsuccessful case, and it must be a mean despicable mind that would.
The case is as follows: — An elderly man applied to Mr. Green with a
hydrocele, which he a few days afterwards tapped. The following day
the man’s business led him to walk to town : on the next day his scro-
tum became inflamed ; the third there was a gangrenous spot ; and, on
the fifth day from the operation, he died.

1 he other case was the father of one of our dressers. I performed the
operation on a Saturday ; the following day he walked to Pancras church ;
on the Monday inflammation began to show itself in the scrotum, when
1 he sent for me ; on the Thursday gangrene had taken place, and on the
|l Saturday week after the operation he died.

Let me advise you then, whenever you perform this operation in old



1R0



ON THE CURE OF HYDROCELE.



persons, to make them keep their beds for a few days afterwards. Some
individuals are destroyed by the slightest touch ; while others, on the
contrary, are not killed, do what we will to them.



LECTURE XXIV.

ON THE CURE OF HYDROCELE.

Hydrocele is not cured by the accidental bursting of the sac; when
this takes place, it is followed by a temporary cessation of the hydrocele,
which either returns again, or is succeeded by liasmatocele. A gentle-
man who had been subject to hydrocele for many years went to the con-
tinent, and whilst riding out on horseback, struck himself against the
pommel of the saddle ; for several hours afterwards the swelling became
considerable ; diffused instead of circumscribed ; absorption, however,
soon took place ; the swelling gradually lessened, and the gentleman
thought that his hydrocele was cured, in fact, he congratulated himself
on it. Not loDg after this the swelling returned, and when he came to
England, he called on me, and I performed the operation for hydrocele,
which presented nothing peculiar. Another case of the bursting of a
hydrocele occurred in the person of Dr. Saunders, of the other hospital,
a person well known in the profession. Whilst standing on a chair to
reach a book, he slipped his foot, by which means he received a blow
on the scrotum, which was enlarged from a collection of water in it.
Mr. Lucas, late surgeon of Guy’s, who had been in the habit of tapping
him for this complaint, was sent for immediately after the accident, to
perform the operation again ; the swelling was very large, and Mr.
Lucas, not at all suspecting that the character of the complaint was
changed, put a trocar into the scrotum, but no water came, which
alarmed the doctor considerably. A consultation was held, at which
many of the most eminent professional men of this town were present ;
the scrotum was swollen and harder than natural, blood was extrava-
sated into the tunica vaginalis; it was determined to attempt to relieve
the swelling and ecchymosis by stimulant lotions, but these failing, an
incision was then made into the scrotum, when there was found some
coagulable blood, which had been substituted for the water. Thus
then a blow on a scrotum affected with hydrocele will change that
disease into hsematocele, which can be afterwards cured by an incision.

The cure of hydrocele is effected in three ways : 1st, by absorption ;
2dly, adhesion ; 3dly, granulation. Now I observe to you in the last
lecture, that when hydrocele is produced in the common way, medicine
or local applications have hardly any influence on it ; when it arises from



ON THE CURE OF HVDROCELE.



181



a relaxed state of the vessels, stimulating medicines and blisters have no
effect on the complaint. But I also stated on a former evening that
hydrocele is produced by an inflammatory state of the parts, and that in
these cases absorption by stimulating lotions should be promoted. I
will now further add, that in young persons and children, who are not
unfrequently subject to this affection, cure by absorption alone is effected,
that is, by giving the hydrargyri submurias, scammony, rhubarb, and
other medicines, so as to dispose the constitution to absorb. The liquor
ammonias acetatis and ammoniae murias are the local applications gene-
rally made use of to promote absorption in the parts, and what we do to
facilitate the operation of these remedies, is, to have a bag or suspensory
truss to hold the scrotum, and this is fastened by two tapes round the
abdomen, just below the umbilicus, and kept constantly wet with those
fluids, in order to stimulate the absorbents; therefore be on your guard
about performing an operation for hydrocele in young persons, as the
cure can be effected by absorption alone ; there are a few exceptions,
however, to this rule, but they are exceedingly rare, as in almost every
case of hydrocele in young persons or children, the water will be
absorbed.

With respect to the adhesion of the tunica vaginalis in the cure of
hydrocele, this is effected in three ways, by injection, seton, or incision ;
but the use of injections does not always produce adhesion of the tunica
vaginalis ; here is a specimen (pointing to one on the table), which was
taken from a captain of a ship one morning, on whom I performed the
operation for hydrocele by injection, by which he was relieved of every
symptom of the complaint; several years after this he was taken ex-
tremely ill, and I was consulted by his attendant surgeon ; he was dy-
ing of some organic affection ; I desired the surgeon to remove the tes-
ticle and tunica vaginalis from the side on which the operation had been
performed, as soon as the patient was dead, which was done ; on exa-
mination it was found that the tunica vaginalis did not adhere completely,
there were a few adhesions in some parts but not generally ; the injection
did not produce adhesion, but a new series of actions was set up, a de-
posit was secreted, and the ends of the arteries were sealed, so that any
further secretion was prevented.

The process of granulation is set up when an incision is made in the
scrotum, and extraneous bodies introduced, but this requires consider-
able caution ; some surgeons use one mode of cure, some another ; va-
rious are the operations which have been proposed, but most have now
yielded to that of injection. In the operation by incision you divide the
scrotum and tunica vaginalis, on the front part, so as to allow the water

a



182



ON THE CURE OF HYDROCELE.



to escape, but it was soon found that this was not sufficient to effect a
cure, and it was then recommended, that after the incision had been
made, a portion of the tunica vaginalis should be cut out : but this
operation is followed by high constitutional irritation ; it is true that it
sometimes effects a cure by preventing the return of the hydrocele, but
it also does it by killing the patient; in fact, the very last time that I
saw this operation performed, a violent inflammation and sloughing of
the scrotum ensued ; why, gentlemen, any one rather than undergo such
an operation, would submit to have a hydrocele all his life ; the mode
of relief is too cruel for so trifling an inconvenience. The next mode is
that of introducing a tent into the tunica vaginalis ; a small incision is
made through the tunica vaginalis and scrotum, and a piece of lint or
sponge is introduced, so as to prevent the sudden escape of the water;
the water gradually issues out, during which time adhesion and granu-
lation often takes place ; but this sometimes fails. Caustic and setons
were formerly very much used, two remedies, about which there was
much bandying and quarrelling among the members of the profession as
if the world were at stake on the issue — two remedies now which are
not only generally abandoned, but which I should be ashamed to own
ever having used ; such is the folly of quarrelling in our profes-
sion ; as for arguments on subjects which are only to be settled by ob-
servation, they are of no use ; and persons who argue thus a. priori,
without a knowledge of facts, which alone ought to form the basis of
argument in our profession, want that judgment which conducts a man
best through life; but many were the advocates of caustic as a cure for
hydrocele; and the way it was used was by taking the potassa fusa, and
applying it to the fore part of the scrotum, till an eschar, of the size of
a sixpence, is formed, which produces an irritation to the extent of half
an inch, or three-quarters of an inch around, and then the eschar so pro-
duced destroys the skin and tunica vaginalis ; as soon as the inflamma-
tion arises, the water escapes, then the part sometimes become glued to-
gether, and granulations arise. Well, gentlemen, this remedy soon fell
into disrepute ; 1st, on account of its uncertainty ; 2dly, because it was
dangerous to life ; here is a specimen (pointing to one on the table),
taken from a person who died from the application of caustic, and this
gives pie an opportunity of showing you the state of the parts after the
use of this application. The operation with caustic is dangerous to life,
and ought not to be performed.



ON THE CURE OE HYDROCELE.



183



OPERATIONS AT PRESENT USED FOR THE CURE OK
HYDROCELE. ,

There are but three operations I know of, which are occasionally had
recourse to in the cure of hydrocele : 1st, setons ; 2dly, incision ;
3dly, injection. Setons are very rarely used, but I tell you, that they
may now and then be, advantageously. The seton should be made in
the following way : you should take a curved needle, and carry it into
the tunica vaginalis and scrotum, just at the point where the trocar had
been previously introduced, and include two inches above the point
where the needle enters, and bring it out sufficiently long ; the result is,
inflammation generally ensues, water gradually escapes, and as this
takes place, adhesion of the tunica vaginalis comes on ; this operation
for adults has been generally abandoned, because better means have
been employed ; it is in those young persons whose hydroceles do not
give way to the absorbent plan before-mentioned : then, if children about
two or three years old have hydroceles, rather than inject, use the needle
and thread : the thread should be allowed to remain for ten or fourteen
days, till inflammation and the adhesive process be set up ; this plan is
much better for children than that of injection, because there is no diffi-
culty in doing the former, and there is considerable in the latter : for the
operation of putting a ligature through the scrotum and tunica vagi-
nalis is effected before the child knows any thing about it ; in fact, after
it is done, the child may run about, the knot being allowed to remain ;
the water escapes by the side of the seton : for children, then, I believe
this to be the best mode.

The second plan is by incision. There is a difference in performing
this operation now to what was done by Mr. Hunter, who had recourse
to it in preference to that by caustic or seton ; Mr. Hunter used to put a
little poultice into the part, after the opening had been made into the
tunica vaginalis ; a surgeon, who was present when Mr. Hunter was
performing the operation, had mistaken the plan which he adopted, for
having heard of the introduction of a poultice into the wound, he had
brought materials for making one, flour, &c., and he began to mix it.
up in the man’s scrotum ; Mr. Hunter, always ready to catch an idea,
sprinkled after this some meal or flour into the wound, so as to prevent
instantaneous adhesion, and promote granulations. This operation
gives you the means to prevent the return of hydrocele in many
cases, yet it is an operation not perfectly unexceptionable ; there are
cogent reasons against performing it, but if there be any suspicion
of a disease of the testicle, it may be done. In old persons it is not
justifiable, and I would advise you against doing it in them. Here is a



184



ON THE CURE OF HYDROCELE.

specimen (exhibiting one) where death ensued after the operation I have
just described ; a surgeon to one of these hospitals, who has long since
been dead, introduced a bit of lint, dipped in oil, into an incision
w'hich he had made into the scrotum ; the result was great constitutional
irritation, and death ; therefore there is danger of this operation in old
persons, from the irritation which is likely to arise.

I shall now proceed to describe to you the operation which has super-
seded all others, namely, the cure of hydrocele by injection. At the
time I was attending Mr. Hunter’s lectures, the town was divided in
opinion as to the best mode of performing the operation for hydrocele.
So great was the difference of opinion among the students of the different
hospitals, that it was quite ridiculous to observe their warmth on this
subject, when there arose a plain, simple, effectual operation, which every
body has since adopted. For this we are indebted to Sir James Earle,
who, in thinking upon this subject, conceived that injection of the tunica
vaginalis was likely to be the best means of producing adhesion, and
preventing the further formation of disease. Thus he proposed at once
a most ingenious, but simple, mode of curing a disease, about which
there had been so many disputes. I cannot help feeling delight, when
I find a brother in the profession rendering himself useful to mankind
by an invention of this kind. When we see so much trash issuing from
the press, which is called surgery, it is gratifying to find, in a work like
Sir James Earle’s a simple and effectual plan of curing a disease pro-
posed, and at once adopted by the whole profession. I do not think Sir J.
Earle has received the due meed of merit to which he is entitled for this
improvement. I have, myself, always spoken of him in the same terms
as this evening, and I shall ever continue to do so. The instruments re-
quired for this operation are an elastic bottle, with a stop-cock, a trocar,
and canula. The elastic bottle should be of moderate size, and only
half the quantity of fluid contained in it should be thrown in at a time,
lest the action of the cremaster should force a part of it into the cellular
tissue. If this happens, inflammation and sloughing may take place
around the part at which the canula is introduced. The trocar should
be two inches long, and the canula should be but small. The trocar
and canula should be put separately into the box, for if you are obliged
to put the trocar in the canula, it will soon contract, rust, and be unfit
for use. The fluid used for the injection should be of a stimulating
kind. If you use port wine, the proportion of wine and water should
be half and half. If it be old port wine, you may mix five parts of
wine with three of water; but if the wine be such as is commonly got
at taverns and public-houses, in which there is a good deal of logwood
or sloe-juice to make it ustringent, and a good deal of brandy to make



ON THE CURE OF HYDROCELE.



185



it strong, a less proportion of wine must be used, as the injection would
otherwise be too stimulating to the tunica vaginalis. Brandy, or spirits
of wine, may also be employed ; in the latter case, take one part of
spirits of wine to fifteen parts of water. The injection which we gene-
rally use in the hospitals is the sulphate of zinc, in the proportion of
one drachm to a pint of water. A gentleman, on being told that we
employed the sulphate of zinc in hospitals, for injection in hydrocele,
exclaimed, “ Oh, I suppose you do this to save your wine.” It is not
to save our wine, however, gentlemen, that we prefer this solution, but
because we are better enabled to judge precisely of the strength of the
stimulus by the use of the sulphate of zinc, than by that of wine, which
is subject to so much adulteration. Water itself will produce a stimu-
lating effect, if used cold. A gentleman, whose name does not imme-
diately occur to me, has written a treatise, in which he produces several
cases of the successful treatment of hydrocele, by an injection of cold
water. You must not suppose, however, that one fluid will answer the
purpose as well as another; for I remember a case in which an injection
of milk, which was used by the surgeon on the supposition of its being
a bland fluid, produced most horrible inflammation. The tunica va-
ginalis suppurated, and when an incision was made to discharge the
matter, the milk came out in curds, and a great quantity of pus had been
produced. Be upon your guard, therefore, against making experiments
of this kind. When you inject for hydrocele, you should place the
patient in a recumbent posture, which will enable you to perform the
operation more steadily. Before you introduce the trocar and canula,
make it a rule to squeeze the scrotum and tunica vaginalis, so as to
make the part where the fluid is most distinct very tense ; then introduce
the trocar and canula obliquely, in the same manner as in the palliative
mode of treatment. Having passed the trocar and canula into the
tunica vaginalis, withdraw the trocar, and push the canula alone care-
fully upwards, so as to prevent any injury to the testicles or spermatic
cord. You should nip the tunica vaginalis round the canula, to guard
against the instrument being diverted, and thus throwing a portion of
the fluid into the cellular tissue. Having taken this precaution, you
are gradually to throw up the injection, turn the stop-cock, so as to
confine it in the tunica vaginalis, and move the scrotum from side to
side, so that the fluid may reach every part of the surface. The fluid
should be suffered to remain from about four to five minutes. While
it remains in the tunica vaginalis, the patient will complain of a good
deal of pain ; he will first feel as if the testicle were squeezed; he will
then feel the pain running along the course of the spermatic cord at the
spinal process of the ilium, and at the loins where the spermatic plexus

it 2



J86



ON THE CURE OF HYDROCELE.



of nerves arises, and lastly, at the neck of the bladder, in the course of
the vas derens. The pain will be greater or less in proportion as the
patient is more or less irritable. It is to be observed, however, that
the degree of subsequent inflammation is generally in the inverse ratio
of the pain suffered at the time of the injection. If a man lies tran-
quilly on the table, and tells you that he does not feel much pain, he
will in general have a considerable degree of inflammation the next day.
On the other hand, where much pain is felt, it is generally the effect of
nervous irritability, and little inflammation follows it.

I have been under the necessity of bleeding and giving large quan-
tities of opium to a patient in consequence of the severity of the pain
produced by injection, and yet no inflammation was produced. You
may say that this was in consequence of the bleeding : but this is not
the case; the pain arises from irritation in the nervous, rather than the
vascular system, and inflammation does not readily follow it. When
you have suffered the fluid to remain five minutes, and withdrawn the
instrument, you need not apply any thing to the part, but tell the
patient to walk about as usual in the course of the day if he feels but
little pain. If he should feel much pain, tell him to lie down, take his
dinner that day, and his glass of wine after it, if he has been in the
habit of doing so. After a few hours have elapsed, inflammation will
probably come on.

Above all, tell your patient to come the next day, that you may sec
whether the inflammation, which is necessary for the cure of hydrocele,
has been produced; if it has not, you must not despair of producing it.
Take the part in your hand, and touch it here and there until the patient
feels a good deal of uneasiness. Then desire him to take a long walk,
and to take an additional quantity of wine after dinner. In this way
you will generally succeed in producing such a degree of inflammation
as will be sufficient to effect a cure.

It sometimes happens, however, in constitutions which have a great
disposition to inflammation, that the injection will act so violently as to
produce suppuration. When there is danger of this, which you may
ascertain by the great pain and redness of the scrotum, make an inaision
with the lancet into the part, and discharge the contents, and if the
opening be not large, the cure will be effected by the adhesive process.
Do not suppose that the operation for hydrocele by injection, simple as
it is, is altogether devoid of danger. There have been some instances
in which death has followed, and many in which life has been endan-
gered by it. Some gentlemen who now hear me have had opportunities
of witnessing the practice of the hospitals for many years, and . they
must have seen many cases, in which extensive sloughing has been



ON THE CURE OF HYDROCELE.



187



produced, in consequence of injury caused by throwing the injection
into the cellular tissue. I will tell you a case which happened shortly
after I became surgeon at the other hospital. I injected the tunica
vaginalis of a patient for hydrocele, but did not succeed in curing him,
for he came back two years after with his hydrocele as large as ever.
He was naturally enough disappointed with me for my want of success,
and he chose to put himself under the care of Mr. Forster. Happening
to cast my eye on the man, as I passed through the wards, I asked him
what was the matter with him, and he said, “ Why, sir, I have got
hydrocele; the disease which you attempted to cure has returned."
Some time after I did not observe the man in the ward, and upon
asking what had become of him, I was told that he had gone out of
the hospital; but as I was walking home over the bridge, the man who
told me so, accosted me and said, “ Sir, I beg your pardon for telling
you a story, but the truth is, that man, about whom you asked, has,
indeed gone out of the hospital, but I omitted to say, that he is dead.”
The truth is, that one of the dressers, who was a very steady young man,
performed the operation of injection, and that an accident happened to
him, which, unless great care be taken, might have happened to any
body. He did not attend sufficiently to keeping the canula within the
tunica vaginalis : the consequence was, that a portion of the fluid went
into the cellular tissue. The man experienced excruciating pain, and
the dresser immediately withdrew the canula, but very little of the fluid
came out. Violent inflammation of the scrotum ensued, which went
on to gangrene, and the patient died. Dr. Farmer recently met with a
similar case, in which sloughing was brought on from the fluid being
injected into the cellular tissue, and the result was destruction of life.
Great care, therefore, should be taken to prevent the fluid from escaping
by the side of the canula.

I shall conclude this lecture with a few observations on hydrocele of
the spermatic cord. This disease may be defined as a collection of
water in the spermatic cord, but it is necessary that you should know
the situation in which the water is collected. The part at which hydro-
cele of the spermatic cord takes place is in the tunica vaginalis, between
the testicle and the abdominal ring, sometimes extending above the
ring, and on that account it is often mistaken for inguinal hernia. By
pressing your finger along the parts until you have passed the abdominal
ring, you may judge of the nature of the tumour by its blue and semi-
transparent appearance, by its being entirely unattended with pain,
and by its not running into the abdomen like inguinal hernia. The
best mode of treating this disease is to make an incision in the tumour,
for injection would, in this situation, be difficult and dangerous ; to in-



388



ON HERNIA.



troduce your finger into the sac, so as to ascertain that there is no com-
munication with the abdomen, and then introduce a small quantity of
flour to promote a slight internal irritation. In this manner the cure of
hydrocele of the spermatic cord may be readily effected.



LECTURE XXV.

ON HERNIA.

We shall now proceed to the subject of hernia. — Hernia is a generic
term, and is used to signify the protrusion of any viscus from a cavity,
though surgeons generally confine it to protrusions of the viscera from
the cavity of the abdomen. In children, who have a malformation of
the bones of the head, you will sometimes see a projection of the brain
through the skull, and this is termed hernia cerebri. I have also seen
the lungs protruding between the ribs, through the intercostal spaces,
though instances of this kind are very rare ; I have met with two only.
But protrusions of the viscera of the abdomen are of the most frequent
occurrence ; and this arises from the bulk of the parts contained in the
abdomen, and the relaxation of its parietes. If you were asked, then,
what hernia is, you would say, a protrusion of any viscus from its
natural cavity.



DIFFERENT RINDS OF HERNIA.

There are four species of hernia more frequently met with than others,
and which it behoves you, therefore, particularly to attend to ; and
here I may observe that hernia is, of all cases, the one that requires the
most prompt treatment and skill. Aneurism and stone are complaints
which give time to the patient and his friends to consult those who have
had greater opportunities than others of observing the diseases under
which they labour ; but with respect to hernia — there is no time to get
aid from distant places ; on your information and nerve will the safety
of the patient depend, and if you be ignorant of this disease, his life

will be lost The four species of abdominal hernia are — 1st. inguinal ;

2d. femoral ; 3d. umbilical ; 4th. ventral.

Inguinal hernia, called sometimes spermatocele, takes the course of
the spermatic cord ; it varies a little in different cases, but generally
follows this course.

Femoral hernia passes behind Poupart’s ligament, on the inside of
the femoral artery and vein, between these vessels and the os pubis.

Umbilical hernia takes the course of the umbilical cord, passing
through the opening in the linea alba behind the umbilicus; this some-



ON HERNIA. 189

times never closes, consequently, an opening remains through which the
f umbilical hernia protrudes.

By ventral hernia, I wish you to understand a protrusion of the inte3-
, tines through the different lines of the abdomen, the lineaalba (except-
j ing at the umbilicus), line® semilunares and transversse, which pro-
j trusion is called ventral, in contradistinction to the umbilical; but
| besides these four kinds of hernia, several others occasionally occur.

Sometimes there is a protrusion through the diaphragm, and this is
1 called phrenic or diaphragmatic hernia ; this hernia occurs in some cases
i between the cesopliagus and aorta, now and then between the aorta and
j vena cava ; but these cannot be relieved by any surgical treatment, as
I they are not situated within view, and are not known to have existed till
they are ascertained upon dissection. You will also find a hernia at
| times between the vagina and rectum in females, called perineal hernia,
i and in males between the rectum and bladder, having the same name.

1 There is also a hernia situated in the vagina, called vaginal hernia; you
i ascertain the nature of this by putting the finger into the vagina; when
j you feel a tumour, you desire the patient to lie down, and it is easily
i reduced ; but it immediately returns when she resumes the erect posi-
1 tion. Hernia sometimes takes place in the foramen ovale, a fine
instance of which you have had an opportunity of seeing this season at
the other hospital, where there were ulcerated sinuses, and the faeces dis-
il charged through them ; so you may see a hernia now and then in the
: ischiatic notch. These different species of hernia are very rare when
il compared to inguinal hernia, therefore we shall rest little on them,
i Now, gentlemen, we shall show you the four different species of abdo-
I minal hernia, as they require different modes of operation, and therefore
I require to be correctly known.

INGUINAL HEltNIA.

We shall mention first, that kind of inguinal hernia which takes the

I course of the spermatic cord ; it begins with the cord just as it passes
out of the abdomen, and follows the direction of the inguinal canal ; its
I course is oblique, and on this account is called oblique inguinal hernia ;
it is readily distinguished from the next kind by its oblique course,
which I shall mention to you. The second kind is the direct inguinal
hernia; in this case, the hernia does not follow the course of the
inguinal canal, but comes out directly through the external abdominal
ring, and pushes before it the fascia transversalis ; if there be any
I obliquity of the hernia, it will be towards the linea alba ; thus you
readily distinguish the one from the other ; in the one case the hernia
will be oblique, in the other directly forwards ; should it be slightly



190



ON HERNIA.



oblique, it will be inclined towards the navel ; therefore, this kind of
hernia is called direct inguinal hernia.

Well, then, there is the hernia in which the intestine protrudes into
the tunica vaginalis, called the congenital hernia ; the tunica vaginalis
Temains unclosed in some persons after birth, and then this hernia
occurs ; now you must not think that this hernia is only to be found
in children, I have met with it in a person thirty years of age ; I have
known hernia of the tunica vaginalis take place only four days previous
to an operation being performed for it, and this in a man of thirty
years of age.

There is a hernia which is found in a cyst in the tunica vaginalis ;
the encysted hernia ; the cyst is formed in a curious way ; here is a
specimen (pointing to one on the table) of this kind of hernia.

Well, then, gentlemen, if asked what are the different kinds of in-
guinal hernia, you would answer — first, the oblique , taking the course
of the spermatic cord. Secondly, the direct , protruding directly out of
the abdomen through the external abdominal ring. Thirdly, the con-
genital hernia , the hernia in contact with the testicle, or rather within
the tunica vaginalis. Fourthly, the encysted hernia of the tunica
vaginalis, formed within that coat.

Of inguinal hernia, the oblique is the most frequent and with respect
to the others they are of less common occurrence.

OBLIQUE INGUINAL HERNIA.

As the hernia takes the course of the spermatic cord, it may not be
amiss to recall to your minds the direction which the cord takes, though
I trust there is not one present who is ignorant of it ; if there should be,
this kind of hernia will not be understood by him. The spermatic cord
emerges, then, from the abdomen, midway between the spine of the
ilium and pubes ; and in this part it will be found just opposite to the
iliac artery ; a hernia protruding through the opening where the sper-
matic cord comes out, carries the peritoneum with it, and a covering of
the fascia transversalis, and when you dissect it, instead of finding
peritoneum, what do you meet with first ? Why, the fascia transversalis,
which surrounds the spermatic cord just as it passes from the abdomen;
and as the cord takes its course through the inguinal canal, a covering
is given off which descends on the cord itself. The inguinal canal
begins at the point where the spermatic cord leaves the abdomen, and
terminates at the lower abdominal ring ; it is about two inches in
length, and contains the cord ; it is bounded anteriorly by the tendon
of the external oblique, fibres of the internal oblique and transversalis
muscles, and posteriorly by the fascia transversalis. The spermatic



ON HERNIA.



191



cord descends then obliquely through this canal, and, just as it passes
through the lower abdominal ring, it receives a covering from the edge
of the external oblique, called the fascia of the cord.

Camper has published some excellent plates showing this fascia, and
how much it is thickened in hernia : well, gentlemen, the spermatic
cord will not make any difference to you in this hernia ; now let me
just remind you that oblique inguinal hernia begins to protrude half
way between the anterior superior spinous process of the ilium and the
symphisis pubis ; in the spot directly anterior to the iliac artery, about
an inch and a half from the lower abdominal ring, opposite to the
tendons of the internal oblique and transversalis muscles, where it will
be important to bear in mind that stricture most frequently occurs :
and not at the abdominal ring, as some surgeons have said ; it is rare
for it to be in this last place : in old hernia the seat of the stricture
may be at this part ; but ask all those who have operated much for
hernia, where the seat of hernia is usually situated, and they will tell
you, not at the abdominal ring, but where I have just mentioned, and
that before you can reach the stricture you have to put your finger deep
down, an inch or more.






Now, when the hernia has protruded through the fascia transversalis,
how are the spermatic and epigastric arteries situated with respect to
it ? The epigastric artery is always on the inner side of the hernial
sac ; here is a specimen (pointing to one on the table), in which its
course is distinctly shown ; in the operation, then, there w T ould be no
danger in wounding this vessel, unless you cut inwards. Divide the
stricture directly upioards , or upwards and outwards, and you will be
quite safe from the epigastric artery.

How is the spermatic artery situated at the origin of the hernial sac?
The hernia is above, and this vessel could only be wounded by cutting
downwards ; there is no danger, in operating for hernia, of wounding
the spermatic artery, therefore banish it from your minds ; the epigastric
is the only one in danger, and that only if you cut inwards. After the
hernia has protruded through the fascia transversalis, it is situated in
the inguinal canal ; the next place where it reaches is just under the
arch formed by the tendon of the internal oblique and transversalis
muscles ; and here it receives a covering from the cremaster ; above the
sac then are the internal oblique and transversalis, and beneath it the
fascia transversalis ; well, after having passed through the inguinal
canal, which may be two inches or from that to two and a half long, it
reaches the lower abdominal ring ; and at this part the hernial sac will
have two coverings, one from the cremaster, and another called the
fascia spermatica ; in this specimen (exhibiting one to the class) you



192



ON HERNIA.



*

see a hernia with all its coverings ; with respect to the spermatic cord,
it is behind the hernia, and the testicle below it ; the internal oblique
and transversalis above it, and the fascia transversalis beneath it.

Were you to dissect a hernia below the abdominal ring, you would
find the fascia of the cord applied tightly over the hernial sac, which
has the appearance of being the sac itself ; there is a fibrous covering
derived from the cremaster muscle ; then cut through these and you see
the hernial sac, having the character of peritoneum ; you pinch it up
with your fingers and divide it, when water immediately escapes. The
epigastric artery is situated very close to the hernia, but a little to the
pubic side. Well, it is generally thought that the hernial sac is an
elongation of the peritoneum ; but in the oblique inguinal hernia it is
not an elongation, but only a real growth of that part. When you look
at the lower part, you will often see a dark-coloured spot, having a blue
appearance in the dead body ; and this point is studded with numerous
vessels, and in it the ulcerative process has commenced.

Some persons say, I mean speculative persons and those who have
never observed, “ Return the hernial sac into the cavity of the ab-
domen but how is it to be returned ? do those persons think that it
has no attachments ? It is bound by firm adhesions, and cannot be
returned except in an incipient state, unless by a painful and dangerous
process of dissection, which it would not be justifiable to perform.

Hernia is subject to several varieties; 1st, it is subject to a variety in
size; this necessarily happens from the difference of its course in
different persons; here is a specimen (exhibiting one to the class), so
small that it has not emerged from the abdominal ring, yet is as perfect
as if it had been immediately below it. Here is another specimen
(pointing to one on the table) which reached to the knee. The largest
hernia I ever saw was in the person of Mr. Gibbon, the historian : com-
bined with this was a large hydrocele, and in consequence of both
complaints he was obliged to wear a peculiar dress.

It sometimes happens that there are hernia with the external covering
so thin that you are enabled to see the peristaltic motion of the intestines;
this is not unfrequently the case in large hernia. I have seen the lower
orifice of the stomach pulled down to the abdominal ring.

Hernia varies as to its contents ; at one time it contains intestines, at
another omentum; and here let me observe that intestines will be gene-
rally found in the hernia of children, and that omentum is very rarely
to be met with in the very young. I stated to you that there were several
varieties, that the hernia sometimes enters the spermatic cord, and splits
it into two parts ; and that the spermatic artery and vein are before, and
the vas deferens behind ; here is a specimen, however, (holding it in the



ON HERNIA.



193



hand) of the spermatic cord being split by a hernia, with the spermatic
artery and vein on the outer, and vas deferens on the inner side; on this
account, in large hernia, if the operation is performed, the opening is
made in the upper and not the lower part ; in large hernia a peculiar mode
of operating is required. I have seen the bladder in a hernial sac; this
happens in the oblique inguinal hernia more frequently than the direct.

Symptoms Now, gentlemen, I have given you the anatomy of in-

guinal hernia, I next come to the symptoms and diagnostic marks of this
disease.

If you were asked how you would know a hernia, what answer would
you give ? Why hernia is to be known when it acts with the abdominal
muscles, dilates and expands on coughing ; 2dly, from its course, be-
ginning from above and gradually descending; 3dly, when the person
is placed in the recumbent posture the hernia returns; and then by these
three means will you be assisted in detecting the hernia. Its reduction
in the recumbent position is a striking mark of distinction, but not
without exception ; and besides, if it is a hernia, when the intestine goes
into the abdomen there is a gurgling noise, from the air and fluid which
it contains. When there is omentum in the sac, the sensation com-
municated to the finger is different; omentum is less easily distended,
more solid. Some surgeons have said, “ Oh! a hernia will be known
to contain omentum by its doughy feel and want of elasticity;” this
may be said in the closet, but will not do at the bedside of the patient.
Here I must remark, that I have seen some of the best surgeons de-
ceived in this point, and that when the contents of the hernial sac have
been said to be intestine, they have been omentum : and when omentum
they have been intestine ; there is not a surgeon of any experience but
will allow with me, that there is considerable difficulty in knowing
whether there is omentum or intestine in the hernial sac. In operating
for hernia, always do it under the impression that intestine is contained
in the hernia, and not omentum, because you will be more on your
guard ; therefore make this an invariable rule.

Diagnosis . — In distinguishing hernia from some other complaints
there is considerable difficulty. — 1st, Hernia is sometimes likely to be
confounded with hydrocele: an instance of this kind I mentioned to you
in another lecture; in this case, had I introduced a trocar, I should
have wounded the intestine, and destruction of life would have been the
consequence. A gentleman very recently told me of a case where a
hemia was mistaken for hydrocele, and the patient died in consequence,
the intestine being wounded by the trocar that was introduced. The
surgeon who told me this had none of those malevolent feelings which
actuate too many of our profession ; it was stated in such a manned



s



194



ON HERNIA.



that it could be neither injurious to the individual who did it, nor to
any other person ; it is a circumstance that every one ought to deplore.

Another reason why you should be on your guard is, that both a
hernia and hydrocele may be present at the same time ; the hydrocele
on the fore part, and the hernia behind. Much to the credit of two
surgeons who operated where both hydrocele and hernia were present,
they performed the operation safely ; the one case fell under the care
of Mr. Thomas Blizard, who is an excellent anatomist, but has lately
relinquished his profession ; of this I am exceedingly sorry, for I think
that a man has two duties to perform, one to himself, and another to
the public; and if a man has opportunities of acquiring information he
should avail himself of them for the benefit of himself and mankind.

I do not mean to censure Mr. Blizard — but I say it to guide others;
and I cannot help thinking that it is wrong for one who possesses so
much substantial information as Mr. Blizard, to withdraw himself from
that sphere in which he might be so useful; he might lessen his labours,
and render them less severe, but not give them up altogether. There
is something in the experience which a surgeon acquires at the bed-side
of the sick that is worth every thing else ; you may be excellent anato-
mists and physiologists, but if you have not watched disease in the wards
of the hospital, or at the bed-side of the patient, you will not understand
your profession.

I have been led into this digression in consequence of Mr. Blizard’s
having withdrawn himself from the profession, a circumstance which I
sincerely lament. Well, Mr. Blizard made an incision on the fore part
of the tumour, and water was immediately discharged. This led him
to think it was not hernia, and he desisted; but the symptoms of
strangulated hernia still being present, he cut through the tunica vagi-
nalis, in which the water had been contained, avoiding the spermatic
cord, and behind he found the hernial sac: he dilated the stricture with
a bistoury, and the patient did extremely well. The other case to
which I alluded, where there was a hernia and hydrocele, occurred to
Mr. H. Cline. After having evacuated the water, he dilated the stric-
ture, and returned the parts ; and, as far as I recollect, the case turned
out well.

There is some little difficulty in distinguishing hydrocele of the sper-
matic cord from hernia; the two diseases are very likely to be con-
founded. The transparency of hydrocele, and its beginning at the
lower part of the scrotum, are in general the characteristic marks of
that complaint ; but I mentioned to you before, that the hydrocele
might be so large as to reach the abdominal ring, when it assumes the
form and shape of hernia, and might be easily confounded with it.



ON HERNIA.



195



There are two other diseases which hernia might bej mistaken for ;
the first of these is varicocele — and what is varicocele? It is an en-
largement of the spermatic veins ; it begins above, and gradually de-
scends into the scrotum : the swelling is of the form of hernia, and on
the hand being applied when the patient coughs, it dilates considerably ;
and moreover, when the patient lies down it disappears ; consequently
this disease is very likely to be mistaken for hernia. Very recently I
saw a case where a patient had been wearing a large spring truss for a
varicocele that had been mistaken for hernia, and which had chafed him
considerably. I tell you, gentlemen, how you shall distinguish it :
Tell the patient to lie down ; raise the testicles, and empty the veins ;
then press firmly on the abdominal ring ; keep your finger firmly there,
and raise the patient from the recumbent position, and the swelling will
return ; then in this easy way may you distinguish varicocele from hernia.

2dly. — The other disease that may be confounded with hernia is
hydrocele of the spermatic cord ; and in this complaint our diagnosis
fails, when the hydrocele is situated above the abdominal ring. In the
recumbent posture there is no appearance of it, but as soon as the
patient rises it returns. It is situated above the ring, opposite to the
tendons of the internal oblique and transversalis : pressure on this part
might be of service.

The diagnosis of hydrocele of the spermatic cord below the ring is
easy ; above it is difficult. A truss, in this complaint, is not an evil,
and may be worn with advantage.



LECTURE XXVI.

CAUSES OF HERNIA.

There are three causes of inguinal hernia ; namely, unusual pressure
of the abdominal viscera, pressure of the parietes of the abdomen, or
relaxation of the parietes. Pressure from within, in consequence of
enlargement of the abdominal viscera, the omentum and mesentery
being loaded with a fatty substance, is a very common cause of in-
guinal hernia. It is well known that animals that are much pampered,
and enjoy a great deal of rest and excessive indulgence, become the
subjects of hernia. Women, in a state of pregnancy, are liable to
hernia, though more frequently to umbilical than inguinal hernia.
The intestines are forced by the uterus as it ascends from the pelvis to
the upper part of the abdomen into a very small space, and in this
manner protrusion sometimes takes place. The hernia is sometimes
situated in the thigh, and sometimes in the groin ; but it may be said



196



ON HERNIA.



to arise less frequently from gestation than from other causes. Hemia
is very commonly produced hy the increased action of the abdominal
muscles, in consequence of some effort disproportioned to the strength
of the person using it. It is for this reason that we find hernia so
much more frequently on the right than on the left side, because we
generally prefer the right side in making any extraordinary exertion,
and the effort made by the muscles is consequently in that direction.
The proportion of hernias on the right to those on the left side is about
sixty-five to thirty-five. Another frequent cause of hernia is relaxation.
Persons advanced in years are often the subjects of hernia, in con-
sequence of relaxation of body. At the time I was endeavouring to
learn as many facts as possible connected with this subject, I examined
most of the bodies brought to the dissecting-rooms in these hospitals,
and found that a large proportion of old persons in this town, who were
under the necessity of using bodily exertion, were subjects of hernia.
It was in some cases necessary to examine these subjects with con-
siderable care before the hernia could be detected ; but upon minute
examination, in the course of the inguinal canal or thigh, I found that
old persons were very generally the subjects of inguinal or femoral,
and sometimes of umbilical hernia. Persons who reside in the country,
or who do not exert themselves in age, are much less subject to this
complaint. It is said that in this town one person in nine is the subject
of hernia ; I do not think the proportion so large ; but I should say
that in this town, which is favourable to the production of the complaint,
from the bad state of the atmosphere, and the relaxation of body pro-
duced by it, the proportion of persons affected with hernia is about one
in fifteen. Heat may be also considered as a cause of hernia, from its
producing relaxation of the abdominal parietes. Thus persons in warm
climates, who use much exertion, are very subject to it. The people of
Prance are much more frequently the subjects of hernia than the
English. When I first entered the H6tel-Dieu, at Paris, I saw a man
carried up the staircase on a sort of bier which they use for the sick,
with strangulated hernia ; and I was afterwards informed that Desault
had that day operated, at the Hdtel-Dieu, on another case of strangu-
lated hernia. This circumstance might have been accidental ; but the
fact is, that hernia is much more common in France than in our own
country. This may arise from the great activity of that people, and, in
some degree, from the warmth of the climate. Persons recovering from
fevers, who are much reduced in strength, are extremely liable to hernia
from any increased bodily exertion, such as riding on horseback.
Certain positions of the body dispose to the production of this com-
plaint; such as the stooping position in lifting heavy weights from the



ON HERNIA. 197

ground. If the person using such exertions is in a relaxed state of
body, hernia is very often the result.

ON THE TREATMENT OF REDUCIBLE HERNIA.

With respect to the treatment of this complaint, gentlemen, it is only
necessary to say, that a person who has a hernia, and does not wear a
truss, is never for a moment safe. The danger of the hernia is greater
in proportion to the smallness of its size. If the hernia be large, it is
more readily returned into the abdomen : it is rarely strangulated ; and
if strangulated, it is more easily reducible. If the hernia be very small,
the ring through which it passes being extremely narrow, the protruded
parts are very tightly embraced, the hernia is very liable to strangula-
tion, and in this state is rarely reducible. The danger of hernia is,
therefore, in the inverse ratio to its size ; and if a person should say to
you, “ I have got a small hernia, but I do not think it of any conse-
quence,” desire him to wear a truss ; and tell him that the smaller his
hernia the more necessary it is that he should wear one.

Various kinds of trusses, some of them very ingenious, have been in-
vented at different periods ; they may all, however, be reduced to four.

The common truss is a very good one, and is, perhaps, a little too
much despised because it is old. This truss, in general, answers the
purpose extremely well : it does not require an understrap ; and it has
this advantage, that it may be worn in the night as well as during the
day. The mode of its application is, merely to place it on the side of the
hernia, and bring it round the body ; and if you use an understrap, this
should be brought between the thighs. (The learned lecturer exhibited
to the class the mode of applying this and the other species of trusses.)
1 do not know whether I may not have a little affection for this kind of
truss ; for, to say the truth, when I was about sixteen or seventeen
years of age, upon hearing a lecture on hernia in this theatre, I disco-
vered, that I was myself the subject of that complaint. As soon as I
felt satisfied of this fact, 1 could attend to no more of the lecture ; but
I went home, threw myself on the bed, kept my legs elevated against the
bed-posts, and remained in that position till Mr. Cline returned. (A
laugh.) I had requested to see him the moment he entered; and as
soon as I saw him I told him that I had had a swelling for some time,
which, after hearing the lecture that night, I was sure was a hernia.
Mr. Cline laughed, gave me a common truss of this description, which
I wore for three years ; at the expiration of which time I had not the
slightest appearance of hernia. I would not, however, leave the truss
off, but I continued to wear it for two years longer, and from that time

s 2



198



ON HERNIA.



up to the present moment, I have never had the least appearance of the
complaint. The circumstance to which I allude may, perhaps, have
given me a greater inclination to attend to this disease, and to investi-
gate all the facts connected with it.

Of late years many improvements have been made in trusses. Here is
a spring-truss (exhibiting it to the class), invented by Mr. Egg, which
does not require any string, but is merely put round the body. This
truss answers the purpose extremely well, and may be worn by night as
well as by day.

A most ingenious truss, which has now come into general use, was
invented some years ago by Mr. Salmon, a gentleman to whom the
profession is indebted for many other ingenious inventions.

This truss, of which the principle is entirely new, is very easily ap-
plied, and may be very conveniently worn. One pad is placed upon the
inguinal canal, on the side of the hernia, and the other pad on the base
of the os sacrum. This truss is not liable to shift its place, and is now
in very general use for incipient hernias, or hernias which are difficult
to keep supported. There is, however, one objection to this truss, and
that is, that it cannot be worn during the night, which is necessary to
produce a cure of hernia. I am aware that some persons say, it is of
no consequence whether the patient wear a truss or not, when he is in a
recumbent posture, but I do not agree in this opinion. Unless a con-
stant pressure be kept up on the inguinal canal, adhesion of the sides of
the sac will not be produced. Besides, if the person cough in the night,
or get out of bed to make water, the hernia is liable to descend, and if this
should happen, though he may have worn the truss steadily for twelve
months before, he must begin to date his cure from the last time at
which the hernia descends.

For this reason I recommended the contrivance of a truss of this kind,
which might be worn equally well night and day, and Mr. Ody, the
successor of Mr. Salmon, has invented a truss of this description. (The
learned lecturer exhibited one of Mr. Ody’s trusses to the class.) This
truss answers extremely well in all cases, except one. It sometimes
happens that you meet with a hernia which you find it exceedingly dif-
ficult to support, and in which none of the varieties of spring trusses
will succeed.

Some years ago, when I lived in the city, an elderly gentleman came
to me with a hernia which could not be supported by any of the trusses
commonly employed. It struck me that a man named Goldfinch had
taken out a patent for a truss, which, as you see (the learned professor
exhibited one of the trusses) is a simple leathern belt, with springs of



ON HERNIA.



199



twisted wire. I sent for one of these trusses, and it succeeded completely
in keeping in the abdomen a hernia for which every other truss had been
tried unsuccessfully.

A person in Kent, who had himself taken out a patent for a truss,
was the subject of hernia. He tried a great variety of trusses, but could
not succeed in keeping his hernia in the abdomen. Mr. Edwards sent
this person to me, and I advised him to try one of these trusses, which
proved successful.

The contrivance and the mode of applying the truss are extremely
simple. You place the pad on the hernia, pass the band round the abdo-
men, and fasten it on the pad ; another pad goes round the inside of
the thigh, and is fastened on the same pad. By this simple contrivance,
the worst hernia, if reducible, may be supported.

You will be asked by the patient when you have applied the truss,
how long he is to wear it ; tell him to wear it at least two years. He
will then ask you whether he is likely to be cured at the end of that
time ; your answer must be, that this will depend upon his age.

A young person is generally cured at the end of two years, but it
will be advisable that he should continue to wear the truss for three
_ years. If the person be not young, there is not much hope of effecting

I the cure of hernia by the wearing of a truss.

Even in these cases, however, a gradual diminution, and sometimes a
_ reduction, of the hernia is effected by the wearing of a truss.

Mr. Gaitskell sent me an elderly patient with strangulated hernia,
which was situated above the abdominal ring, and was extremely small.

I This patient told me that the hernia was formerly so large that it was
in his purse, meaning it had descended into the scrotum : but that he
i had worn a truss for a number of years, and that it had become gra-
dually reduced in size. This hernia was eventually reduced, though
| with great difficulty. In general, if the patient’s age exceed forty years,

I I do not promise a cure by the wearing of a truss.

When a truss has been worn for some time, the effect upon the her-
J nial sac is, that it falls into folds by the action of the cremaster, resem-
| bling the appearance of the stomach after death, when it has undergone
■ contraction. Here is a specimen on the table, which will show you this
• effect of the truss upon the hernial sac. It sometimes happens, when
lia hernia is cured by the wearing of a truss, that water forms beneath
I the part at which adhesion takes place, producing hydrocele of a parti-
cular kind. The fluid in this case is clear, as water, and has not the
_ji common character of serum.

■

■






200



ON HERNIA.



OF IRREDUCIBLE HERNIA.

Hernia becomes irreducible from various causes; the most common
cause is, the adhesion of omentum or intestine to the interior of the
hernial bag.

Here is a preparation, showing how completely a hernia is rendered
irreducible by the adhesion of omentum to the interior of the sac. A
second cause is the growth of omentum or mesentery, without adhesion,
from the accumulation of adeps, which renders it impossible to return
the hernia into the cavity of the abdomen. A third cause is the forma-
tion of a membranous band, produced by inflammation across the sac,
by which the omentum and intestine become entangled, and the return
of the protruded parts is prevented.

OF THE TREATMENT OF IRREDUCIBLE HERNIA.

With respect to the treatment of irreducible scrotal hernia, you must
advise the patient to wear a simple suspensory bandage, without which
he would be exposed to considerable danger, from the possibility of the
hernia bursting, if he should receive a blow on the part. Mr. Norris
had a patient whose hernia suddenly burst, in consequence of his strik-
ing his scrotum against a post, while he was walking in the streets of
London. The hernia was returned, but the patient soon died. I knew
a man with irreducible hernia, who met with a similar accident, in con-
sequence of his falling from a ladder upon the edge of a pail. The
omentum could not be returned into the cavity of the abdomen, and it
was found, upon examination of the body after death, that the
intestines were wounded.

A patient with irreducible hernia is always exposed to considerable
danger from blows which he may receive. If the hernia burst, the in-
testine may be returned into the abdomen, but the omentum in general
cannot be returned.

When a hernia is rendered irreducible by the growth of the mesen-
tery or omentum, there is no doubt that a patient may be relieved by
abstinence in diet, and by taking such means as are calculated to reduce
the bulk. Few patients, however, can be induced to observe such a de-
gree of abstinence as may lead to the absorption of a considerable
quantity of adeps, but the effects which disease produces upon hernia,
by reducing the bulk of the patient, prove that benefit would arise from
adopting a plan of abstinence. A man, who had water in his chest,
came to town in consequence of an irreducible hernia, which he found
extremely troublesome. When I visited him, he told me that his hernia
had never disturbed him until of late, when he had been troubled by a



ON HERNIA.



201



severe cough. He had at this time swellings in the legs, and other
symptoms of water on the chest. He became very much reduced by
this disease, and the hernia which was previously irreducible became
reducible, and was readily returned into the cavity of the abdomen, in
consequence of the absorption of fatty matter in the omentum and
mesentery, by the effects of his disease.

If the hernia is rendered irreducible, in consequence of the formation
of a membranous band across the sac, you cannot depend upon any plan
to effect its reduction. The long-continued application of cold will some-
times effect the reduction.

A gentleman in the profession, from Edinburgh, who was going out
to a situation in India, after travelling all night in the mail to London,
was unable to return his hernia into the abdomen. He was quite free
from pain, and there was no gurgling noise indicating the presence of
intestine. I told him, therefore, that I did not think it of much con-
sequence, but that he should make pressure upon it by wearing a truss.
He was unwilling, however, to go out to India with his hernia for a
companion ; under these circumstances I told him I did not exactly
know what to recommend, but that I would advise him to place himself
in a recumbent posture, and apply ice to the scrotum regularly every day ;
by this means a reduction of its bulk was at length, though very gra-
dually, effected, so that the hernia could be returned into the abdomen.

In those cases in which the hernia is very large and irreducible, the
best plan is to advise the patient to wear a laced suspensory bag, which,
by its pressure on the scrotum, will not only prevent the hernia from
increasing, but will diminish its size by absorption. In this manner a
bulky hernia may be rendered much less inconvenient to the patient.
This, gentlemen, is all 1 have to communicate to you on the subject of
irreducible hernia.

With respect to wearing a truss in this state of hernia, if the patient
should feel any pain, it will not be advisable. If a truss be worn in irre-
ducible hernia, the spring should be very slight, so as to occasion no
pain ; otherwise there will be danger of strangulation.

STRANGULATED HERNIA.

I shall now proceed to consider the symptoms and treatment of stran-
gulated hernia.

A hernia is said to be strangulated, when it is not only confined within
the parts into which it has descended, but when it is so 'much com-
pressed by the narrow part through which it has passed, that the circula-
tion in the intestine or omentum which has descended is in a great degree
stopped. Some portion of blood is still capable of being carried to the



202



ON HERNIA.



part by the arteries, but it cannot be returned by the veins. It is a
mistake to suppose that the hernia is merely incarcerated ; it is not only
incarcerated, but it is so constringed by the narrow orifice through
which it has passed, that the circulation in the intestine or omentum is
in a great degree impeded.

With respect to the symptoms which accompany strangulated hernia,
the patient first complains of pain about the region of the diaphragm.
He will describe the sensation to be as if he felt a cord bound tightly
round the upper part of the stomach. The next symptom is constant
eructation, owing to the great quantity of air rising from the intestines
to the stomach. I he patient is next troubled with vomiting, accom-
panied with costiveness. He has a great disposition to have motions,
but cannot succeed in his attempts to expel the faces. There is some
paiu in the swelling, and a good deal at the part where the stricture is
situated.

These symptoms attend the first dawn of strangulation. The abdo-
men afterwards becomes considerably distended with air, not at first
from inflammation, but in consequence of the accumulation of flatus in
the intestines. This is evident, because the patient does not at first
complain of pain on pressure of the abdomen.

The vomiting becomes more frequent, and feculent matter is rejected
from the stomach ; I am aware it has been said that this is impossible ;
but really, gentlemen, one can hardly hear this fact denied, and preserve
one’s patience.

The contents of the intestines thrown up from the stomach have the
common smell of faeces, and most of you are aware that the contents of
the intestines do not acquire the smell peculiar to faeces until they have
passed the valve of the ilium. The matter thrown up from the stomach
has not only the solidity of faeces, but the smell peculiar to them ; and
any man who denies that it is feculent matter, must really resist the evi-
dence of his senses. The fagt is, that as soon as a hernia becomes
strangulated, inversion of the peristaltic motion of the intestines begins.

If any of you have not witnessed the peristaltic motion of the intes-
tines, I advise you to get a rabbit, strike it on the back of the head, and
immediately open its abdomen, in order to see the peristaltic motion of
the intestines. No man ought to practise his profession without know-
ing accurately the nature of the peristaltic motion of the intestines.

Well, gentlemen, as soon as any portion of the intestines is strangu-
lated, the anti-peristaltic motion begins ; the valve of the ilium is of no
use, and the action of the intestines becomes retrograde. Hence, the
patient loses the power of discharging the fajces, and they are thrown
up in the action of vomiting. A clyster will sometimes bring away a



ON HERNIA.



203



portion of feculent matter, but the quantity will be extremely small.
During the time that the abdomen is in this tense state, but unaccom-
panied with pain, and while there is frequent vomiting of the faeces,
the pulse is hard, frequent, and very distinct ; but in the next stage of
symptoms, when the abdomen is not only tense but painful to the
touch, you will find the pulse extremely small and frequent ; so small
that it can scarcely be felt ; so frequent that it can hardly be counted.
The vomiting and eructations continue, and the patient is pale, and
covered with a cold perspiration. The tumour becomes very tense,
hard, and in general a little inflamed, on the surface of the skin.

A person unaccustomed to observe the symptoms of strangulated
hernia, when he felt the pulse of the patient, and perceived symptoms
of peritoneal inflammation, in the tenderness of the abdomen upon pres-
sure, would say, that blood ought not to be taken in such a case, and
that if it were, the patient would be destroyed.

Gentlemen, the reverse of this is the truth; you must not be deterred
by these symptoms by taking away blood in considerable quantities. The
strength of the patient’s pulse will be increased instead of being dimi-
nished by this course, and in proportion as he is young and athletic, a
larger quantity of blood must be taken away.

The next change in the symptoms of strangulated hernia is, that
in addition to the vomiting, which is not less frequent, hiccough
supervenes.

Hiccough was formerly considered to be a sign of the presence of
gangrene, but it is now known not to be so. Patients have had hiccough
for many hours, and have recovered after the operation for strangulated
hernia. After the appearance of hiccough, you may prevent gangrene
by bleeding, and using other means for reducing the patient. The
hiccough will sometimes remain for several days after the operation,
and, in this case, bleeding will relieve the patient more than any thing
else.

When gangrene has actually taken place, the patient will tell you
that he has got rid of all his pain, and that he feels a great deal better;
but if you put your hand on his abdomen you will find it still tense
and tender ; his pulse will be intermitting, small, and irregular, and
the swelling will feel tense and somewhat emphysematous.

In this state it sometimes happens that the hernia, by a little pres-
sure may be returned into the abdomen, in consequence of the great re-
laxation of the surrounding parts from the effects of gangrene. Death,
however, is close at hand.

I saw a man in this state at the other hospital, who declared that he
was a great deal better, and begged to have a little small beer. I desired






204



ON HERNIA.



the sister to give him some, and while he was in the act of elevating
himself in bed to drink it, he fell back and expired. Be upon your
guard, therefore, against encouraging the friends of a patient under
such circumstances. Many a professional man has injured his repu-
tation by holding out hopes of recovery from these delusive appear-
ances, when in fact death is on the very point of closing the suffer-
ings of the patient.



LECTURE XXVII.

APPEARANCES ON DISSECTION FOR HERNIA.

Upon dissecting a person who has died of strangulated hernia, you will
find a considerable effusion of lymph in the cellular tissue in the neigh-
bourhood of the hernial sac ; and if gangrene had taken place, the
parts will be found emphysematous ; and wherever you press with the
finger the impression will remain, that is, that part will pit. When
you open the hernial sac, there will immediately escape a considerable
quantity of serum ; however, I ought to state, that the quantity of this
fluid depends upon the nature of the hernia ; the principle is this : — if
it be an omental hernia, there will be but little — if it be intestinal
hernia, then a considerable portion will be present. The omentum un-
dergoes a considerable change in its colour, being much darker than
natural, owing to its vessels being filled by coagulated blood — it will
likewise have an offensive smell, and if gangrenous, the smell will be
highly putrefactive — its texture also becomes very much altered, not
being so solid as before death, having a crackling feel, as if it contained
water or air, and easily breaking by the employment of the slightest
force. Behind the omentum will be seen the intestine (if both are in
the sac), having upon its surface a peel of adhesive matter ; therefore,
before you touch the intestine, you come to a layer of adhesive matter,
with the nature of which you must all of you by this time be well ac-
quainted — this adhesive matter ; glues together such portions of the
intestine as happen to be in contact. The intestine will be found of a
very dark colour, if it be not gangrenous, for that is not the character of
gangrene, and when you are operating for strangulated hernia, if you
should find the intestine as dark as red wine, still you would be justified
in returning it into the abdomen, for when it is gangrenous, its appear-
ance is very different, having upon its surface a number of green spots —
not oreen at every part, but green spots interspersed here and there over
the whole surface.'

Persons, therefore, acquainted with the diagnosis of this disease look
for small green spots, which readily yield and give way to pressure by



ON HERNIA.



203



>



the finger. The very dark intestine is not in a gangrenous state, but in
a different condition. In common inflammation of an intestine, then,
its appearance is florid — but not so in inflammation of a strangulated
intestine contained in a hernial sac ; here it is rendered exceedingly
dark, owing to the interruption of the return of blood occasioned by the
stricture. The general character of parts in a gangrenous state is, their
being inelastic, and readily yielding to pressure. Well, then, continu-
ing the examination — as soon as you cut into the cavity of the abdomen
there will burst forth a considerable quantity of gas, and the intestines
within the abdomen, wherever they are found in contact, will be seen
having upon them a red line, which red line will only be perceptible in
those situations where the different convolutions touch each other ; such,
then, are the appearances discovered upon dissection of those who die of
strangulated hernia. The next circumstance to look for is the seat of
stricture ; this is sometimes found at the abdominal ring, but not ge-
nerally, except in old hernia.

It is quite an erroneous opinion to suppose that the stricture is usually
situated at the ring ; even the apprentices of these hospitals can tell you
the contrary, and certainly it is not situated there in one case out of five,
excepting, as I before remarked, in very large and old hernias. Those
surgeons, therefore, who believe that the stricture in strangulated hernia
is situated at the abdominal ring are quite unequal in point of surgical
knowledge to the performance of this operation.

Far be it from me to ransack the graves of those who have been de-
stroyed by surgeons, who suppose that the abdominal ring is the only
situation at which stricture occurs. He, therefore, who goes to the
operation with a belief that he shall find the stricture at the ring, and
that it is not to be found at any other situation, is most lamentably
ignorant of the true nature of this disease. In large old hernia, the
stricture certainly generally happens at the abdominal ring ; but in recent
hcrnise, and those of a smaller size, it usually occurs above it, as I shall
presently explain to you.

Well, then, where is the stricture commonly situated in strangulated
inguinal hernia? W hy, I will tell you, gentlemen, opposite the tendon
of the transversalis muscle, which circumstance is often produced in con-
sequence of the thickening of the hernial sac, from the pressure of a
truss. Sometimes the stricture is an inch above the abdominal ring ;
,at others, when the hernia is very large, at the ring. But when the
hernia is very small, the stricture is often two inches above the ring.
And it is owing to this circumstance, that the finger is often lost in
oblique inguinal hernia before the stricture can be felt, so far above the
ring is it situated. Sometimes the finger feels the stricture an inch



T



206



ON HERNIA.



above the ring, at others an inch and a half, or even two inches — and in
each of these situations it is very common. The third place in which
the stricture is found is at the neck of the hernial sac, in consequence of
a membranous band crossing it at that part.

The following case will illustrate this most clearly ; a man was ad-
mitted into this hospital having strangulated hernia ; after the ordinary
means for reducing it had been used without success, it was determined
to perform the operation ; the finger, after the first division of the sup-
posed stricture, could be freely admitted within the ring, yet the intes-
tines could not be returned into the abdomen ; the opening w as enlarged,
and the finger again introduced, the intestine was again attempted to be
returned, and the surgeon, after some difficulty, succeeded in forcing
it out of sight ; as it was no longer to be seen, he in all probability,
thought it out of jeopardy, and the patient was sent to his bed. The
following day, when the dresser went to see this man, he found a portion
of intestines protruding ; this was allowed to remain — it soon began to
slough, which, day after day, continued to increase until he died. Upon
examination, it was found that there was a membranous band crossing
the neck of the hernial sac — the surgeon, therefore, in attempting to
return the intestine, had doubled it over this band, consequently the
cause of strangulation was never removed; here (holding up a prepara-
tion), gentlemen, you have an opportunity of observing the sac and band
of which I have just been speaking ; and you now see the intestine still in
a strangulated state. It is not, therefore, sufficient to divide the stricture ;
but before the operation can be complete, you must be satisfied that the
cause of strangulation is likewise removed, and that the intestine has
been decidedly returned within the cavity of the abdomen.

Another cause of strangulation, gentlemen, arises from a portion of
intestine being occasionally entangled in a part of the omentum. I saw
a case of this kind in a patient under the care of Mr. Pew, of Fen-
church-street; after having divided the stricture, I was obliged, as it
were, to unravel the intestine from the omentum, and even tore through
a part of the omentum, before I was enabled to remove the cause of
strangulation.

There are four situations in which the stricture is to be met with : at
the abdominal ring in large and old hernia ; in ordinary cases, an inch
and a half or two inches above the abdominal ring, according to the size
of the hernia ; the stricture is sometimes, but rarely, occasioned by a
membranous band across the sac ; or by a portion of omentum becoming
entangled with the intestine. Knowing these facts, you will be able to
contend with whatever appearances you may meet with in cases for
which you are required to operate.



ON HERNIA.



207



You will be asked, gentlemen, what is the cause of strangulation in
intestinal hernia ? It will not be a sufficient answer to say, that a por-
tion of intestine has descended into the sac ; because it often happens
that strangulation is produced, although only a single convolution has
descended, and this convolution being elongated, does not occupy any
additional space in the mouth of the hernia. The fact is, that the addi-
tional portion of intestine, though it consist only of a single volume,
brings down with it a portion of mesentery, which added to the piece
of intestine previously descended, so completely occupies the space of
the opening as to produce the symptoms of strangulation. This is the
reason why hernia often becomes strangulated in consequence of very
slight efforts ; in lifting a weight a small portion of intestine may de-
scend, and this bringing with it a portion of mesentery, produces stran-
gulation. In omental hernia you will readily understand how strangu-
lation is produced, because any portion of omentum which descends
must occupy an additional space.

OF THE TREATMENT OF STRANGULATED HERNIA.

When a person has strangulated hernia he has no hope of safety, but
in returning the intestine into the cavity of the abdomen ; this, there-
fore, must be your first object, except in one or two cases, which I shall
hereafter have occasion to mention. In order to effect this object of
returning the hernia into the cavity of the abdomen, you are to employ
what is called the taxis.

The taxis is a particular kind of pressure on the hernia, which is to
be performed in the following manner : — You are to embrace the lower
part of the hernia with your hand, elevate it gently, and push it towards
the abdominal ring ; having done this with one hand, you are to put the
finger and thumb, of the other on the part just above the abdominal
ring, and knead it gently by a successive motion of the finger and thumb,
until you at last obtain a passage for a small portion of intestine or
omentum through the strictured part into the abdomen.

When, by this process, you have gradually insinuated a small portion
of intestine into the abdomen, it generally happens that the rest will
follow, and the hernia will consequently be returned. It is of no use to
make pressure on the hernia, with a view of emptying the intestines of
their contents. This is an erroneous principle, for the contents of the
intestines are very rarely the cause of stricture. It does, indeed, now
and then happen that an indigestible mass occupies the orifice by which
the hernia descends ; but in general nothing will be gained by pressure
on the swelling, with a view of emptying the intestines of their con-
tents.



208



ON HERNIA.



The time in which a hernia is returned by the process of the taxis is
generally from ten to fifteen minutes. Do not attempt to perform it at
once ; proceed gently and gradually, and never press with any consider-
able force on the lower part of the swelling. Pressure at the orifice
will not endanger the parts, but if you press with any force on the lower
part of the swelling, you will run the risk of bursting the intestine.
Sometimes, indeed, we find the parts in such a state as to render the
operation unavailing, as where the intestines have given way, and fecu-
lent matter has descended into the hernial sac. Be upon your guard,
therefore, not to employ so much force as to endanger the bursting of
the intestine. It too often happens in our hospitals that patients are
lost in consequence of gentlemen being suffered tc make repeated trials
of the taxis. It would be a good rule, and I wish it were adopted in
our hospitals, if the taxis were only to be used once for a quarter of an
hour, and not repeated until other means were employed. The repeti-
tion of the taxis is not only useless at the time, but often renders all
other means for returning the hernia, which may be subsequently em-
ployed, unavailing.

It now and then happens, that a person is so extremely sensitive, and
resists the employment of the taxis with so much violence, that it will be
impossible to persevere, for a time at least, in its use.

Mr. Croft, the surgeon, called upon me when I lived in the city, and
requested me to see a patient of his with strangulated hernia. I went
with him immediately, and while we were walking to the patient’s house,
Mr. Croft said, “ I do not think you will be able to return this man’s
hernia.” I smiled, and said, “ Why not ?” Mr. Croft stated, that
the parts about the abdomen were so exquisitely tender, that he had
found it impossible to use the taxis. In fact, when I arrived, I found
the patient’s abdomen exceedingly tense, and he roared out so violently,
and resisted me so much when 1 attempted to employ the taxis, that I
found it impossible to persevere. Under these circumstances, I desired
some ice to be applied, with a view of diminishing the sensibility of the
part and facilitating the employment of the taxis. I called again in the
evening, but was told that it was not necessary to go up stairs, for the
hernia had returned of itself. In cases, therefore, where the patient
suffers excruciating pain, do not employ the taxis immediately, but
advise the application of ice, which will reduce the irritability of the part,
and perhaps render its employment unnecessary. Mr. Newington had a
patient with strangulated hernia, which returned by the application of
cold water.

If you are called to a case of strangulated hernia, and find that the
taxis does not succeed in reducing it, I advise you directly to lake atvuy



ON HERNIA.



209



blood. The quantity of blood must be proportioned to the age of the
patient ; if he be young and athletic, a considerable quantity should be
taken away; if he be extremely old, you should hesitate in taking away
much blood ; but if he be of the middle age, and not infirm, you should
bleed freely. This course is to be taken not merely with a view of
reducing the hernia, but to prevent peritoneal inflammation after the
operation, if the operation should be necessary.

It is a most mistaken view of the nature of this disease to suppose
that the patient is safe after the hernia is returned by the operation ; on
the contrary, he is in the greatest danger after the operation unless he
has been freely bled before it. If you should be asked to what extent
you would bleed in strangulated hernia, your answer should be, until it
produces faintness, because it is in that state that the hernia is most
likely to be returned. If you carry the bleeding short of this state of
faintness, you may as well not bleed at all. If, therefore, the patient
be strong, and in the middle period of life, you should make him stand
up before you, and bleed him from a large orifice, until he complains
that he shall not be able to stand unless you support him. At this mo-
ment the taxis will be most likely to succeed in reducing the hernia :
and peritoneal inflammation after the reduction will at the same time be
prevented. If a surgeon, therefore, does not take away blood freely
under such circumstances, his conduct will be most unpardonable.

The next mode of treatment pursued in the hospitals, where it can
be most conveniently employed, is to put the patient into a warm bath.
The usual course is to put him into a bath heated to from 90 to 100
deg., for a quarter of an hour, and after his body has been well
washed and cleansed, it is supposed that his hernia will be more easily
returned. But what is the use of such a plan of treatment l by what
principle are they who recommend it guided ? It may soothe and tran-
quillize the patient for the moment, but no effectual benefit can result
from putting the patient into a warm bath, unless you keep him in it
until tainting is produced. In this state you will support the patient
by putting your hand behind his head ; and while the abdominal muscles
are relaxed, you may employ the taxis with success. It will be better
to do this while the patient is in the bath, or at all events, if he is taken
out of the bath, you should take care to cover him with blankets, so
that the faintness may not be removed ; you will hear persons say that
this remedy is of no use; it is of no use unless fainting be produced,
for without this effect it ought not to be employed.

But surgeons make use of opposite plans of treatment : cold , for in-
stance, and with considerable success and advantage, not by reducing



210



ON HERNIA.



the volume of air, as has been absurdly stated ; for first, it has not the
effect of doing this ; and secondly, if it had, it would be of no service.

The diminution of the volume of air will do no good whilst the pres-
sure remains the same ; cold operates beneficially in two ways : 1st, by
astringing the scrotum, and diminishing its bulk, by which means it
presses against the hernia, and facilitates the return. 2dly. It appears
to have a sympathetic effect in lessening and retarding the inflammation
of the intestines : soon after the cold is applied, there is a diminution
of pain, and it saves the patient from the danger of active inflamma-
tion ; cold then is of considerable use when delay is wanted ; it now
and then happens that you would like to have a surgeon at your elbow
in operating for hernia, though you might be quite equal to the task, to
sanction your proceedings ; as for the fate, heaven alone knows, for it is
extremely uncertain.

Apply cold then in cases where, during the interim, you wish to have
time to consult ; as it delays, at least, the return of inflammation. I
have seen persons brought into the surgery of this hospital when the
snow has been on the ground, and they have been placed flat on a board,
and snow or ice has been applied ; immediately they have become easy,
and in a short time the hernia returned ; therefore, the application of ice
is useful in two points of view. It happens, however, that ice cannot
always be procured ; particularly in the country, and the substances
which you will use as substitutes are the nitrate of potash, and muriate
of ammonia; these are to be mixed together, and about a table-spoon-
ful is to be put into a pint of water; this will produce a degree of cold
equal to 26 deg. Fahr., six degrees below the freezing point ; if you
breathe on a vessel containing thin mixture, the halitus will be con-
verted to ice ; a greater degree of cold than this even might be obtained
by the addition of more nitrate of potash and sal ammoniac ; as low as
20 deg. Fahr., twelve degrees below the freezing point ; the only objec-
tion to this is, that it does not retain its cold, but requires to be often
repeated. Linen, wetted with this mixture, spread over a part, pro-
duces a considerable degree of cold. When ice is employed, it should
be put into a bladder, and broken into small pieces ; it should be half
filled, and the part completely enveloped in it ; if it is put into linen,
there is a danger of some escaping, and destroying the life of the
parts on which it goes. A case of this kind once happened in this
hospital.

Another means that has been used, and the most successful of all is
the tobacco enema ; it is the most powerful agent we possess ; take one
drachm of the tobacco, and add a pint of boiling water, let the infusion



ON HERNIA.



211



remain about a quarter of an hour, anil then strain; use only half at
once to begin with, for though some persons might bear the whole and
even more, yet there are others who cannot bear the least thing. The
effect of this remedy is to quicken the pulse, and also make it small ;
the skin becomes cold and pallid, and there is extreme relaxation of the
muscles.

A case of umbilical hernia that I saw, with a surgeon in the neigh-
bourhood of London, was diminished under the use of the tobacco
enema, and, on the application of the hand, it was easily returned,
though it had previously resisted the taxis. The effect of the tobacco
enema in hernia depends much upon whether the hernia is situated near
muscle or tendon ; if it is surrounded by the former the effect will be
considerable and instantaneous.

In femoral hernia, which is covered before by a strong fascia, and
where there is a strong bone resting against it posteriorly, the tobacco
has not the same effect as in umbilical or inguinal hernia; in umbilical
hernia its action is most considerable : in inguinal next.

What I would do if I had strangulated hernia would be this : I
would have the taxis employed steadily for ten or fifteen minutes : if
this did not succeed, I would be bled to syncope, and then have the
reduction by the hand attempted again ; if this also proved unsuccessful,
I would have the tobacco injection, and wait a short time ; and then, if
necessary, have the operation performed ; it is the most egregious
ignorance possible to delay the operation so long as is often done, thereby
wasting those precious moments which, if properly used, might have
been spent in saving the life of the patient ; ask those about our hospi-
tals, who are the persons who die from strangulated hernia ? and they
will tell you those who have the operation delayed three or four days,
and are not brought to the hospital till three days after the hernia has
been strangulated, and then, if operated on, they often die : the delay is
the cause of the danger, and not the operation. I have had a little per-
sonal experience of this complaint, and have devoted no small share of
my attention to it, and 1 would not wait more than twelve hours, if the
tobacco enema and other means had been employed.

Now let me allude to the case of a late illustrious nobleman— I am
almost afraid now to mention names — who died of this disease; he was
in the country, and during his stay there, had strangulated hernia; he
was attended by a person of strong mind, and who had studied his pro-
fession with industry ; he offered to perform the operation, but it was
delayed, on the ground that London skill and advice should be obtained ;
but before this could be had, the nobleman died : I do not mean to
under-value London skill, but it cer'ainly is great folly to delay in this



212



ON HERNIA.



complaint. I would propose the operation, and perform it readily if it
was agreed to ; but if not, I would wash my hands of the affair, and be
freed from the consequences.



LECTURE XXVIII.

DIRECT INGUINAL HERNIA.

Our principal object, in this evening’s lecture, will be to describe to
you the operation for strangulated inguinal hernia, and to show you, on
the dead subject, the manner of performing that operation. Before I
state to you, however, the best method of performing this operation, I
will say a few words on the subject of direct inguinal hernia, or that
which protrudes directly out of the abdomen through the external abdo-
minal ring. It was formerly supposed that this was always the course
which inguinal heruia took ; it is scarcely necessary to tell you, that
this opinion is quite erroneous ; but it does occasionally happen that
hernia takes place in the direction in which it was formerly supposed con-
stantly to occur. Direct inguinal hernia begins on the inner side of the
epigastric artery, between it and the pubes. Direct inguinal hernia does
not take the course of the inguinal canal, but it passes through the
lower part to the abdominal ring. The length of this hernia is not
more than an inch at the utmost behind the abdominal ring ; in general,
it is not more than three quarters of an inch behind it. It proceeds
through the abdominal ring, and is received into the scrotum, where
it has three coverings instead of two, as in the case of oblique inguinal
hernia.

I have already stated to you, that in the latter it receives a covering
from the external oblique, namely, the aponeurosis or fascia of the cord,
and another covering from the cremaster, both of them of considerable
density, and thicker than the hernial sac itself. Direct inguinal hernia
passes on the inner side of the epigastric artery, and directly as it
emerges from the ring is received under the fascia of the cord, which
forms one covering ; the cremaster passes over obliquely, so that the
whole surface is not covered by it. Besides these coverings, it has one
of its own, which is properly the covering of the hernia, half of which
is formed by the tendon of the transversalis, and the other half by the
fascia transversalis. This forms a complete tendinous pouch, in which
the hernia is contained, as may be seen in a beautiful preparation on
the table.

If you are asked, therefore, in what respect direct inguinal hernia dif-
fers from oblique, you will answer, that the latter emerges from the



ON HERNIA.



213



abdomen, midway between the spine of the ilium and the pubes,
whereas the former emerges directly behind the abdominal ring. One
takes the course of the spermatic cord, and the other passes directly
through the abdominal ring, from behind; one is covered by the
fascia of the cord and the cremaster, the other has an additional
covering, derived from the tendon of the transversalis and its
fascia. It may be said that I am entering very minutely into details
of the structure of the parts ; but in this disease, gentlemen, your
knowledge of the anatomy of the parts cannot be too minute, and
unless you are thoroughly acquainted with it, you had better never
attempt to operate in hernia at all. This is not a disease in which a
man imperfectly acquainted with the anatomy of the parts will be able
to operate ; if his knowledge of their structure be not most accurate and
I minute, he will not be able to overcome the difficulties with which he
i may have to contend. Some gentlemen who now hear me may have
I witnessed the embarrassments of surgeons, who have come to the ope-
i ration for strangulated hernia without a sufficient knowledge of anatomy.

; A surgeon unacquainted with the facts to which I have just drawn your
' attention, will make his incision upon the hernia, and as soon as he sees
the fascia of the cord he will make a little cut, dividing a few fibres,
under which he will put a director, and proceed to make a slit upwards.
Instead, however, of coming to the hernial sac, as he expected, he will
: find something else to divide ; and in this state of embarrassment he
will probably turn round for assistance, and ask what he should next
do. Such a man, gentlemen, ought never to enter the operating
(theatre : no man should attempt to perform an operation, if he is obliged
ko apply to others for assistance. Well, he will divide this covering ;
land still, not coming to the hernial sac, he will probably express his
|surprise at finding the hernia so completely buried. Gentlemen, if a
tsurgeon is acquainted with the anatomy of the parts, he knows that
•there are, of necessity, two layers to divide before he comes to the
Ihemial sac ; and that in direct inguinal hernia there is, besides the
icoverings formed by the aponeurosis or fascia of the cord and the cre-
•ni aster, a third covering, like the peritoneal bag, composed of the ten-
Klon of the transversalis and its fascia. There is a preparation on the
(table which will give you an opportunity of seeing the epigastric artery
fclose to the mouth of the direct inguinal hernia, on the outer side. This
Species of hernia was first observed by Mr. Cline, senior, in the year
M 777, on opening the body of a person who had been a patient of Mr.
Ulawkes, of Chelsea. He was surprised to find the hernia on the inner
side of the epigastric artery, and he was in the habit of mentioning this
lease in his lectures. 1 his circumstance led others to observe this ape-



214



ON HERNIA.



cies of hernia, and it is now well known to occur occasionally. I can-
not state exactly the proportion of cases of oblique to those of direct
inguinal hernia. There is at this time, in the other hospital, a patient
with fracture of the thigh-bone, who has also direct inguinal hernia.

You will be asked how you distinguish direct from oblique inguinal
hernia ; your answer should be, that they are distinguished by the two
following circumstances : — In the first place, tracing the spermatic
cord, you will find that in direct inguinal hernia, the hernia is behind
the spermatic cord, whereas in oblique inguinal hernia the spermatic
cord is behind the hernia. Secondly , when you trace the mouth of the
hernial sac, in oblique hernia, you find it above the abdominal ring,
towards the spine of the ilium ; whereas in direct hernia there is rather |
an inclination inwards, towards the umbilicus, so that it passes in I
a direction from without towards the pubes ; from above downwards,
with a slight obliquity outwards. These are two points which can only
be distinguished by those who have frequently observed the disease in
the living subject, and who have also had frequent opportunities of i
examining, in the dissecting-room, the bodies of those who have died
under the disease. Bearing these points in your minds, you will be
able to form correct general principles by which you may be guided in
performing the operation for strangulated inguinal hernia.

The cause of direct inguinal hernia is generally some great exertion
of the lower part of the abdominal muscles. Ithappens most frequently
in patients who are the subjects of stricture. The greatest number of
herniae I have ever seen in one patient amounted to five. This man,
who had a very bad stricture, had three hernia; on one side, and two on
the other; one on the inner side of the epigastric artery, one on the
inner side of the umbilical, two on the opposite side of the epigastric,
and another on the opposite side of the umbilical artery. This species
of hernia arises more frequently from the efforts made to expel the urine
in cases of stricture, than from any other cause. Direct hernia maybe
truly called a rupture ; whenever a tear of the parts takes place, direct,
and not oblique inguinal hernia is produced : I have never seen an
oblique hernia produced by a blow on the abdomen. When the direct
hernia is reducible, you should apply the truss not so as to press upon
the pubes, for this will give pain, but upon the parts a little above the
abdominal ring. You should not press upon the whole of the inguinal
canal, as in the case of oblique hernia ; but the truss should be so
applied as to make its pressure bear towards the centre of the abdominal
ring. When a direct inguinal hernia is strangulated, the patient is
often in great danger, though it appears to be reduced, as the intestine
may still be strangulated within the hernia. An out-patient at the




ON HERNIA.



215



other hospital came to the surgery with strangulated hernia, and a
gentleman supposed he had succeeded in returning it, as he had
pushed it through the abdominal ring. As the man, however, still
complained of pain, he was admitted into the hospital. The symptoms
I were not relieved ; no stools could be procured, and in three or four days

I he died. On examination of the body after death, it was found that
the hernia had passed through the abdominal ring, but the stricture was
still remaining upon it ; so that the hernia was strangulated behind the
j abdominal ring.

OPERATION FOR STRANGULATED HERNIA.

Before I describe to you the operation for strangulated hernia, let me
I; make one or two observations : first, perform the operation before there
j is any peritoneal tenderness : there will be always tension of the abdo-
men from inflation of the intestines, as I mentioned to you before ; but
I tenderness from peritoneal inflammation, if present when the operation
i is performed, renders the issue doubtful; because, though the division
of the stricture liberates the parts which are pressed, yet it does not re-
tard peritoneal inflammation ; therefore make it a rule to operate before
any symptom of it appears. Secondly, you may wait a longer time in
old persons before you perform the operation, than in the young or
middle-aged. In a boy, for instance, you should wait but a very short
! time after you have used the other means ; in an older person you may
j stop longer, because the parts are generally more relaxed. Having used
the means which I recommended to be adopted, without success, you
1 will then proceed to the operation. The patient should be placed on a
: table from two to three feet high, with the legs hanging over the end ;
the hair having been previously removed from the pubes, so as to pre-
vent any getting into the wound, you should commence the incision
from the upper part of the tumour, in whatever situation it may be,
and carry it along its middle to the lower part ; there will be no neces-
sity to continue the incision quite to the lower part, if the hernia be
large, as then it often happens that there are vessels crossing in that
part. By the first incision you lay bare the fascia of the cord, and in
doing this you will divide a small artery, the external pudendal, which
crosses directly opposite to the abdominal ring ; some will then say to
the assistant, “ Press on the artery till the operation is over; ” but
the instant the finger is removed, a jet of blood issues forth, and ob-
scures the part which you are so anxious to see distinctly. The better
I plan is, to take a tenaculum, and secure the two ends of the artery, by
which means you will be able to have a good view of the different parts
during the remainder of the operation.



216



ON HERNIA.



Having secured the vessel, you scratch through the fascia of the cord,
just below the ring, with considerable care, separating it from the cre-
master muscle ; a small opening being made, you introduce a director
upwards to the abdominal ring, and inferiorly to the lower part of the
swelling, and divide the fascia more or less, as may be required ; the
next parts that will be brought into view are the fibres of the cremaster
muscle, passing obliquely from above downwards ; this covering is of
considerable density, and must be opened with care ; a director is to
be introduced under it, in the same way as the fascia of the cord, and
then it is to be divided ; as soon as this is done the hernial sac becomes
exposed ; it is of a blue appearance, and semi-transparen't, from the
fluid it contains ; so the character of the sac is quite different from that
of the coverings, and the one may be easily distinguished from the other.
Having laid bare the sac, you pinch it between your fingers, and feel
distinctly the intestine and omentum within it; in rubbing the hernial
sac between the fingers do not use any force, as this is exceedingly dan-
gerous ; well, when you have raised the sac so as to separate it from its
contents, take the knife and make a small cut into it, not downwards,
but in a lateral direction ; place the instrument horizontally, so as to
avoid the danger of wounding the intestine, a danger to which you
would be exposed if you cut downwards. As soon as an opening is
made, water generally escapes, if intestine be included in the sac, and
there are no adhesions. Having opened the hernial sac, a director is to be
introduced as far as the abdominal ring, and then it is to be divided up
to that extent ; the director is then to be carried to the lower part of the
sac in the same way. When both omentum and intestine are in the
sac, the omentum will be found before, and the intestine behind ; there
will also be a small portion of omentum at the upper part. After hav-
ing opened the hernial sac, the great difficulty commences; you are next
to feel for the stricture ; put your finger (and the little one is best
for the purpose) into the hernial sac, and ascertain if the stricture is
situated in the abdominal ring ; and if it is, what you have to do is, to
spread the omentum on the fore part of the intestine, like an apron, so
as to cover it entirely ; by this plan the intestine is less liable to be
wounded, and it adds exceedingly to the security of the patient ; and
then you pass a probe-pointed bistoury, guided on the finger, and divide
the stricture, not very freely, but to a small extent ; a slight motion of
the knife will do it. But the stricture is seldom situated at the abdo-
minal ring. I recollect asking one of our apprentices, last year, how
many times he had seen the stricture at the abdominal ring, and he told
me never. My experience does not exactly coincide with this ; but I
believe the stricture is never situated in that part but in old and large.



ON HERNIA.



217



herni®; and if a man sits down to the operation, under the supposition

I that it is there, he will be likely to destroy the life of the patient : I will
tell you what he would do, he would pass the instrument on the finger
| up to the abdominal ring, and divide it ; then he would endeavour to
push the intestine into the abdomen, but it would return as often as the
attempt was made; and not conceiving the stricture at any other part,
his attempts would be repeated, and the force employed would most
probably rupture the intestine. No, gentlemen, the stricture is usually
situated at the upper part of the hernia, just opposite to the tendon of
| the transversalis muscle, or else in the hernial sac itself ; and what you
have to do is, to slit up the abdominal ring, to hook up the abdominal
muscles, and draw them upwards towards the abdomen ; then to pull
down the hernial sac ; by this means you expose the stricture, and render
| the operation more safe to the patient. The plan that used to be adopted
was, to introduce the finger high up into the hernial sac, with the knife
on it, and thus divide the stricture ; but in this way the danger is in-
creased, as the parts are concealed from view. The probe-pointed bis-
| toury is blunt to the extent of a quarter of an inch, sharp for half an

i inch, and then blunt again, so that you introduce it on a director or

finger, and divide the stricture without fear of cutting too much. The
stricture being divided, you next return the intestine ; the intestine is
to be returned before the omentum. You should always at this stage
introduce a finger, to see whether the parts be freely returned or not,
and are not compressed at the place where the stricture was situated ;

I another advice that I will give you is, if there be any air in the intestines

projecting above the stricture, bring it down to the lower part, and by

this means they will be more easily returned. The intestines should be
returned piece-meal to the cavity of the abdomen, and then the omen-
tum should succeed it. But there is one point that I have not spoken
of, on which I will say a few words : the direction in which you are to
divide the stricture so as to avoid the epigastric artery ; it has been said
that this artery has been made a bug-bear to frighten students, and that
the danger of wounding it has been magnified ; but, gentlemen, look at
the specimen (exhibiting one to the class) contained in this glass ; see
the effects of dividing this artery; I might say, here is murder—

“ Out damn’d spot! ”

This specimen was sent me by Mr. Lawrence, an excellent surgeon,
the bare mention of whose name will be sufficient to awaken feelings of
respect in the minds of all for his character as a surgeon, an anatomist,
and a man. Mr. Lawrence dissected it from a patient who had died
after the operation for strangulated hernia, and he found that the epigas-
' * tr * c artery had been divided ; thinking that it would be a valuable addi-



v



218



ON HERNIA.



tion to the museum, he was kind enough to send it. One of our gen-
tlemen was so unfortunate as to divide the artery, because he cut
inwards instead of outwards, thinking that the hernia was inclined a
little in that direction ; therefore a person who is an excellent anatomist
may wound the epigastric artery, if he divide the stricture in a lateral
direction ; but not so if he follow the rule that I have laid down, viz.
to cut directly upwards. You must divide the stricture in the centre,
and cut upwards, let the hernia be where it may ; bear this rule in mind,
and you will be in no danger of wounding the epigastric artery. I will
now tell you how you are to treat the omentum and intestine. There is
some difficulty in ascertaining whether the intestine be gangrenous or
not ; if there be any dark brown spots on it do not let that prevent you
from returning it. Sometimes the intestine adheres to the sac ; if the
adhesions be slight, break them down with the finger, or divide them
very cautiously with the knife. If they are in general strong, the best
plan will be completely to divide the stricture, so as to return the stran-
gulation, and leave the intestine in an irreducible state. An irreducible
hernia is not dangerous, provided there be no strangulation. You will
know whether the intestine be in a gangrenous state from the appear-
ance of thick green spots, which may be easily broken down with the
nail. What would you do under such circumstances ? I cannot do
better than relate a case in which you will have both precept and exam-
ple : A woman was brought to this hospital with strangulated hernia,
under the care of Mr. Chandler. The dresser came up to me (I was in
one of the squares of the hospital at the time), and said that he was
going to see for Mr. Chandler, and that if he were not at home, he
would request me to operate. Mr. Chandler not being at home, I was
sent for to perform the operation. There was a blush on the parts,
which, together with their soft state, led me to think that gangrene had
commenced ; this opinion I soon found to be correct. As soon as I
made an incision through the integument, there was a strong smell
of putrescence and faeces, I proceeded, opened the hernial sac, and
turned it aside to expose the intestine, and divided the stricture ;
the gut appeared almost in too bad a state to return. It then struck
me, that I could relieve this patient, and I made an incision an inch
long on the front of the intestine, allowed the fteces to escape, and re-
turned the intestine to the abdomen. The operation was performed on
a Friday ; feculent matter continued to discharge through the wound,
and not by the regular canal, till the Wednesday following. Two
days after this, a week from the operation, she had several stools per
anum, of a greenish colour ; and the patient recovered. Sometime
after, Mr. Brown, of Rotherhithe, a very respectable surgeon, called on



ON HERNIA.



219



me, and said that I should be surprised to hear that the patient I had
operated on in this hospital, at such a time, had been delivered of a
full-grown child. A curious circumstance attending this is, that she
was with child at the time of the operation and did not miscarry. The
operation was performed in March, and the woman was brought to bed
in August, at which time there was no appearance of any thing to be
seen.

The learned professor now went through the different steps of the
operation for strangulated hernia on the dead subject, precisely in the
way recommended in another part of the lecture.



LECTURE XXIX.



THE SUBJECT OF HERNIA CONTINUED.

I mentioned to you, gentlemen, in the last lecture the mode in
which the intestines are to be treated under the different circumstances
of adhesion, gangrene, or strangulation. But there is one point I
omitted on that occasion. There is a peculiar sort of hernia which con-
tains the ccecum ; this gut sometimes descends into an inguinal hernia
on the right side, and on dissection you find that it adheres to the pos-
terior surface of the scrotum. This ccecum is not enclosed in the hernial
sac, but the hernial sac is before it. Those who have studied the
anatomy of the viscera know that the ccecum is confined posteriorly by
cellular membrane, and that the peritoneum passes over it anteriorly.
On the posterior surface of the ccecum there is no peritoneum, unlike,
in this respect, to the other intestines, with the exception of the duode-
num and colon. When the ccecum, therefore, descends it brings down
the peritoneum in front ; but behind there is merely cellular membrane,
by which means it is confined to the scrotum so securely, that it is im-
possible, in many cases to return it ; then the stricture must be divided,
land the intestine allowed to remain. Last summer many of you had
n opportunity of seeing this kind of hernia operated on, by Mr. Key ;
he patient did extremely well. I have never operated on a case of this
ind myself, but have dissected it, and I always found the intestine ad-
icring to the back of the scrotum, the same as when the bladder is in
n inguinal hernia. When the bladder protrudes in a hernia, it is co-
ered anteriorly by peritoneum, but posteriorly it is confined by cellular
embrane, the same as the ccecum. When the ccecum is included in a
lernia, it will be known by the appendix cceci vermiformis.

Treatment of the Omentum . — With regard to the omentum after the
peration for strangulated hernia, it is more easy to treat than intestine.



220



ON HERNIA.



If* the quantity of omentum be small, and little changed in character,
you must return it to the mouth of the hernial sac, so as to seal up the
opening ; if the omentum is only returned to this part, it glues the
sides of the mouth together, and prevents the ready descent of hernia
in future. This then is the plan you are to pursue with the omentum,
when it is small, and its character little changed.

But it often happens that a considerable portion of the omentum
descends. When this is the case, the omentum is not thin and fine as
in its natural state, but the different layers unite and form a solid mass.
Here are two specimens (exhibiting them to the class) in which large
portions of omentum had descended. The plan that you are to adopt
under these circumstances, is to remove a large part of the omentum
by the knife, and return the remainder to the mouth of the sac to plug
up the opening. After cutting away the omentum, numerous vessels
will frequently bleed ; these should be drawn out with a small pair of
forceps and lacerated ; the laceration of the vessels often stops the
bleeding. When the vessels continue to bleed, ligatures should be
applied ; care should be taken that the ligatures are merely put on the
vessels, and that no omentum is included. The ligatures must be let
to hang out of the hernial sac, and in three or four days they will
separate. When the omentum adheres to the internal part of the hernial
sac, considerable freedom may be used in destroying the adhesions ; but
I would not advise the use of the knife ; just tear through those first in
front, with the finger, and then spread the liberated omentum out, and
lastly, tear through the adhesions which confine the omentum to the back
of the sac ; ligatures must be applied to the bleeding vessels. When the
adhesions are torn through, and the vessels secured, the omentum must
be returned as mentioned above: take care that all the vessels are secured
and that hemorrhage has entirely ceased ; else when the omentum is re-
turned, the warmth will bring on the bleeding.

OMENTUM IN A STATE OF GANGRENE.

When the omentum is in a gangrenous state, it will be known by the
blood coagulating in the veins, and this is the criterion whether it is to
be returned or not. To ascertain this, pass your fingers along the sur-
face of the omentum, and if the blood be coagulated in the veins, there
will be a crispy feel. The omentum in a state of gangrene has nothing
of the blue appearance seen on gangrenous surfaces, nor any of the green
spots to be found on the intestine in a similar state. When the omentum
is gangrenous, excision is the treatment always adopted ; cut away the
omentum close to tile mouth of the hernial bag, and leave the remainder
to plug up the opening ; the vessels must be secured. The practice of



ON HERNIA.



221



the old surgeons used to be, to apply a ligature on the part just above
the gangrene, a practice that one scarcely knows how sufficiently to con-
demn. What is the operation for strangulated hernia performed for ?
to accomplish what object ? Why, to relieve the omentum or intestine
from its strangulated state. Under the old plan, no sooner was this done,
than a stricture, worse than the one which existed before the operation,
was produced; consequently the continuation of the symptoms and ul-
timately destruction of life, used to be the consequence. The practice
is one that cannot be thought of without our being shocked that it was
ever adopted.

Treatment after the Operation . — You must bring the integuments
together, and keep them in apposition by means of sutures ; do not in-
clude any parts in the sutures but the skin, and bring the edges so in
contact as to produce adhesion ; if you can effect this a great advantage
will be gained. After the operation for strangulated hernia there are
two things from which danger is to be apprehended ; first, that the in-
testines may not perform their office, and the faeces not pass in their
natural course ; secondly and principally, that peritoneal inflammation
may come on, and produce the same effect as if gangrene were present.
The object then should be to close the wound as completely as possible,
and for this purpose slight pressure will be of service. If the hernial
sac remains open, the process of adhesion will be difficult ; but if ad-
hesion of the sac takes place, peritoneal inflammation will probably be
prevented. After the integuments have been brought together by means
of sutures, slight pressure should be made by dossils of lint, and the
parts should be supported in a suspensory bandage. The suspensory
bandage will be of use in preventing the formation of matter in the
scrotum. There are three things, then, that you are to attend to in the
after treatment: first, keeping the parts together by sutures; secondly,
applying pressure by dossils of lint ; thirdly, the use of the suspensory
bandage. You order the patient to keep the horizontal posture, but
above all, direct that he have his evacuations on foul linen, and not be
allowed to get up. If strict orders be not given to this effect, the patient
will get up to go stool, and great mischief will most probably be done
by the exertion. Mr. Cline operated on a patient in this hospital for
strangulated hernia, and the parts were returned to the abdomen ; but
the patient got out of bed a short time after the operation, and when on
the close-stool the intestine descended into the sac, and displaced the
dressings. Mr. Cline was sent for, who found the hernia as large as
before the operation ; he reduced it, and ordered that the patient should
not quit his bed. I mention this case to point out to you the necessity
of enjoining the horizontal posture. You will be gratified on the fol-

u 2



222



ON HERNIA.



lowing day if the patient have a motion. In five or six hours after the
operation give a little sulphate of magnesia or castor oil. The more
motions a patient has after the operation for hernia the better; I never
saw any injury done to persons from having too many, but have seen
them die for want of a sufficient number. When a patient has two or
three motions, the surgeon thinks he will do well, but the danger is not
over, and it will be necessary to keep up a free discharge from the bowels
by opening medicines, or the patient will die. The history of a case is
generally this : in four or five hours after the operation the patient has
a motion, and in the course of twenty-four hours, two or three, and he
will be supposed to be doing well. On the following day there will be
no motion ; the abdomen is tense and tender to the touch, and vomiting
comes on. The patient, gentlemen, at this time is in the greatest dan-
ger ; you must bleed largely and purge him freely by medicines or in-
jections. You do not find that the peritoneal inflammation usually
comes on, if venesection has been resorted to before the operation. Ca-
lomel with opium should be given ; five, or even in some cases ten,
grains of calomel, and from one to two grains of opium. It will be
useless to give calomel with any other medicine than opium, for it will
be rejected ; purgative clysters, together with cathartic extract, should
also be administered. Were I to tell you how many I have known do
well for three days, and then die after all, I should enumerate- a long
list ; great danger is to be apprehended for some time afterwards, and
even those who have two or three motions within the first twenty-four
hours often die. The patient will be sometimes affected with hiccough;
this is not the result of gangrene, but peritoneal inflammation, and must
be treated by bleeding and purgatives ; these may be aided by a little
opium.

I will mention to you the most striking example that now occurs to
my mind of hiccough after the operation. I was sent for to Maidstone,
to operate on a patient for strangulated hernia. The gentleman had a
large intestinal hernia, and the symptoms were exceedingly severe. I
performed the operation, returned the intestine, and left the patient in
what is termed a comfortable state. I was exceedingly gratified on the
following day to hear that the patient was very easy ; but it was stated
in the letter that the hiccough was as bad as when I operated. I wrote
to say that this was not the result of gangrene. No, gentlemen, I assure
you it is the result of peritoneal inflammation ; and take my word for it,
no other means but the antiphlogistic treatment will do. The patient
of whom I am speaking was bled twice. The operation was performed
on Monday, and the hiccough did not leave him till the following Sun-
day ; during great part of the time there was tenderness of the abdomen



ON HERNIA.



223



on pressure. The hiccough then, I again repeat, is not the result of
gangrene, but of inflammation of the peritoneum, or intestine. The
treatment you are to pursue is to deplete the patient, and procure copious
evacuations from the intestines.

I will tell you the circumstances to be attended to respecting the
return of a hernia : The operation does not prevent the future descent
of the intestine ; but the application of a truss early prevents it from
being so large. The patient should be kept in bed for some time after
the operation, and good granulations be produced. Dossils of lint should
be applied and a truss, so as to make pressure, and close the upper part
of the sac. Never let the patient rise from bed without a truss to press
on the sides of the sac. It has been proposed to cut away the hernial
sac, in order to produce a more rapid cure. The hernial sac has been
cut away ; and I will relate to you a case in which you will have an
opportunity of seeing the result of this treatment: Mr. Holt, an in-

telligent surgeon, sent for me to go with him to Tottenham, as he was
going to perform the operation for strangulated hernia; I went; and
Mr. Holt operated ; all the steps of the operation were well performed.
When the stricture was divided and the parts returned, Mr Holt said,
what shall we do with the hernial sac, for it appears quite detached and
isolated ? I stated that I thought it would be a fine opportunity for
ascertaining the result of cutting away the hernial sac. It was removed
at the neck, and in three weeks from this, hearing that the woman was
out of bed, I called on her ; she was up and had a truss on. On exa-
mining the part, I found that there was a rupture as large as that before
the operation, nay, larger, and that there was no adhesion of the mouth
of the sac.

The cutting away of the hernial sac is quite useless. Plans have
been proposed of introducing gold wire for the purpose of dividing the
hernial sac at the mouth, also of rubbing the parts with certain sub-
stances for the purpose of exciting adhesive inflammation; but all these
proposals are mere quackeries. One of those fellows who are in the
habit of publishing their cures of hernia, and their methods of pre-
venting the future descent of the hernial sac, called upon me, and asked
whether I would like to go and see a patient of his, whom he had cured
by rubbing the parts with some preparation. “ Why upon my word,”
said I, “ I feel no inclination to go, for I know you might just as well
ask me to go and see you jump to the moon ! ” — “ Well, sir,” said he,
“ then you will not see him ? “ No,” said I, “ I will not.” Four

or five months after, this man, having quarrelled with the junto with
which he was united, came to me, and said, “ Sir, it was entirely an
imposition. What do you suppose we rubbed our patients with, in order



224



ON HERNIA.



to impose upon the public “ I cannot tell,” said I “ Sir,” replied

he, “ it was nothing but hedge-hog’s fat. It cost us some trouble to
catch our hedge-hogs ; but it was the fat of that animal with which we
pretended to prevent the descent of hernia.” — You may suppose, gen-
tlemen, that I felt no regret at having refused to see this man’s patient.

OPERATION FOR LARGE HERNIA.

I shall now proceed to describe to you the operation for hernia when
of considerable size, which requires a very different mode of treatment
from hernia of a small size. I know no situation in which a man is
placed under greater difficulty than that in which a surgeon has to
operate on a hernia of very considerable size, and finds a great quantity
of intestine in the lap of the patient, and the parts so diminished from
the length of time the hernia has existed, that there is no room left for
the return of the intestine which has descended. He tries to push back
the intestine ; it eludes his efforts, and after repeated attempts, when he
has at length succeeded in returning a considerable portion of it into the
abdomen, the whole rushes down again into the scrotum. So much
handling of the intestine necessarily leads to such a degree of inflam-
mation as to occasion the death of the patient. In this manner, a large
hernia, when operated upon in the common way, generally proves de-
structive of life. Here is an example (exhibiting a preparation to the
class) which shows you the result of such cases. This preparation was
taken from a patient in the other hospital, who had a hernia of a very
considerable size, which was operated upon in the common way, by
making an incision into the hernial sac. The surgeon who performed
the operation, finding the intestine returning upon him in the manner I
have described, another surgeon, who was present, said, “ Let me try.”
He began trying apparently very gently and carefully, but the intestine
eluded his attempts, and upon his using a little more force, it burst, and
the faeces escaped over his hands. This man lived a week after the
operation, and then died from want of nutrition. It was the small in-
testine which burst, and the faeces escaping by the orifice, there was no
opportunity for such a degree of lacteal absorption as was necessary
for the support of his constitution, and he died from irritation and
inanition.

I shall now give you an account of a case, and describe to you an
operation which is not difficult, and which may be adopted with safety
to the patient in these cases. After the lecture, one evening, Mr. Birch’s
dresser came to me arid said, “ Sir, there is a patient with a very large
hernia, which is strangulated ; Mr. Birch does not like to come down to
the hospital at such an hour, and I should be glad if you would under-



ON HERNIA.



225



take it.” I went immediately ; the patient was brought into the opera-
ting theatre, and a most formidable hernia it was. I said to the gentlemen
in the theatre, if I operate in the usual manner on this hernia, I know
what will be the result ; I shall either burst the intestine in attempting
to return it, or I shall not be able to return it at all : I will not open
the hernial sac. The man was placed on the table, and I operated upon
him in the following manner: — I made an incision to the extent of
three inches in the upper part of the hernia, an inch and a half above
the abdominal ring, and an inch and a half below it, believing that I
should find the stricture at the abdominal ring, as it was a large hernia,
or not more than an inch above the ring. This incision exposed the
tendon of the external oblique, above the abdominal ring, and the fascia
of the cord, or superficial fascia, which is derived from "the tendon of the
external oblique below the ring. Having made this incision, and laid
bare the fascia of the cord, I made a small opening to the extent of
about an inch below the abdominal ring, and put a director into it.
Having insinuated the director between the fascia of the cord and the
cremaster, I passed it under the abdominal ring; and carrying a probe-
pointed bistoury upon this director, I divided the ring to the extent of
an inch. I then put my hands upon each side of this immense swelling ;
and as soon as I did so, I had the pleasure of hearing the gurgling
noise, which every surgeon acquainted with this subject knows to be
the token of the contents of the intestine passing into the abdomen : a
portion of the intestines was returned into the cavity of the abdomen,
but all the force I could venture to use could not return the whole.
By dividing the stricture, however, the man was relieved from the
symptoms under which he had previously laboured. On the following
morning, when I visited the patient, I found that he had a very bad
cough, in consequence of which the contents of the abdomen had been
thrown again into the sac, and the hernia was as large as when I per-
formed the operation. There were no symptoms of strangulation, how-
ever: the portion of intestine was easily returned into the abdomen by
pressure; and I had ultimately the satisfaction of seeing this man dis-
charged from the hospital perfectly cured. I have performed this ope-
ration three times: in two cases successfully; in one of them the patient
afterwards died of peritoneal inflammation. All you have to do is, to
bring the edges of the wound together, and let the hernia, if large,
remain. 1 he patient whose case I just mentioned wears a bag-truss,
and is in the habit of coming to Launday’s to get a new truss, which is
made to lace so as to reduce the size of the hernia. If I had a
large hernia strangulated, this is the operation which I would have
performed.



ON HERNIA.



226



HERNIA IN THE INGUINAL CANAL.

There is a small hernia that occurs above the abdominal ring, and
does not emerge through it at all, which is equally as dangerous as a
hernia of twenty times its magnitude. This is a case which it is difficult
to ascertain in the living subject. A patient will come to you with
symptoms of strangulated hernia, and you find a fulness on one side
above the abdominal ring, which is not observable on the other; ten-
derness upon pressure of the part where the fulness is, and a great dis-
position to vomit. The operation which it will be necessary to perform
in this case is, to make an incision along the course of the inguinal
canal, a little obliquely above the abdominal ring, so as to avoid making
the opening large. The incision through the integuments lays bare the
tendon of the external oblique ; having laid bare this tendon, and made
an incision through it, the hernia immediately appears projecting
through the edges of the wound. The hernial bag is covered by a ten-
dinous process, which passes from the upper aperture, from which the
hernia proceeds. As soon as the hernial sac is laid bare, a little fluid
escapes; you will find the stricture at the orifice. Here is a beautiful
preparation (exhibiting it to the class) in which you see the stricture,
and the appearances which the hernial sac assumes. You are to intro-
duce a small director into the orifice, and divide the stricture by making
a slit upwards with a probe-pointed bistoury.



LECTURE XXX.

OF INGUINAL HERNIA IN THE FEMALE.

This disease is of less frequent occurrence in the female than in the
male, in consequence of the smallness of the parts through which the
ligamentum rotundum descends. The abdominal ring is small, the
passage of the ligamentum rotundum from the abdomen much less than
in the male, and the inguinal canal, upon the whole, less. Hernia in
the female is therefore comparatively rare. When it occurs, the course
which it takes is similar to that of inguinal hernia in the male, com-
paring the ligamentum rotundum in the former case to the spermatic
cord in the latter. It begins midway between the spine of the ilium and
the symphysis pubis ; its origin being situated on the external side of
the epigastric artery. It then enters the inguinal canal, passes along
the canal, under the internal oblique and transversalis muscles, till it
reaches the abdominal ring, where it emerges. Hernia in the female is
commonly small, especially in the labia ; the sac is much more consider-



ON HERNIA.



227



able above the abdominal ring than below it. On this account there is
considerable difficulty in the performance of an operation for this hernia.
When you dissect a hernia in the female, you will find, immediately
below the labia, a fascia covering the hernia similar to that in the male:
the abdominal ring gives off a fascia, which descends into the labia.
When the hernia is reducible, it requires a truss similar to that used for
the male ; as it is generally small, it will give way to pressure after
about a twelvemonth’s use, but it will be right to continue the truss for
two years longer. Inguinal hernia is more commonly reducible in the
female than in the male; in fact, I have never seen an instance of irre-
ducible hernia in the female. If you should meet with one which con-
tained omentum, you should endeavour so to apply the truss as to
promote absorption of the omentum, and produce an adhesion between
it and the internal part of the sac. When, from the gurgling noise, you
ascertain that intestine has descended, it will be desirable that a truss
should be constructed with a hollow in the pad, so as to embrace the
hernia, and prevent the increase of its bulk, while at the same time it
does not make such a degree of pressure as to give any interruption to
the passage of the faeces. When this hernia is strangulated, the ope-
ration for it differs in some respects from that required for inguinal hernia
in the male. When you have made your incision upon the hernia
below the ring, you will find that the peritoneal bag does not contain
either intestine or omentum, and that nothing but a little water escapes.
1 his leads you to slit up the abdominal ring, and on putting your finger
within it, you will find something contained within the sac. above the
ring ; this is generally intestine, but sometimes a portion of omentum
descends with it. All the cases of inguinal hernia in the female which
I have seen have been intestinal. Having divided the tendon of the
external oblique, you will find a convolution of intestine has descended,
and you will then look for the stricture, which you will generally find
about two inches above the abdominal ring. In the male, the inguinal
canal is considerably shortened by the approximation of the upper to
the lower opening, but in the female the canal undergoes little alteration,
and you will in general therefore find the orifice of the hernial sac at the
d, stance of at least two inches from the abdominal ring. Having slit
up the tendon of the external oblique from an inch to an inch and a half,
t .recto jour assistant to draw it up, you will put a director within
t ie sac, ee or t le stricture, and dilate it upwards or outwards towards
t.ie spinous process of the ilium. The general rule is to divide it up.
w.ir s, but it may be divided outwards with safety, as there is no danger

•rJ t* CaSC ° fCUUin S *^ 1e W^ic artery, which is on the inner side,
e ast case of strangulated hernia, in the female, which I saw at



228



ON HERNIA.



Ouy s, was one under the care of Mr. Forster, and it was a very em-
barrassing one. When Mr. Forster had made his incision below the
abdominal ring, he was surprised at observing a gush of water ; and
finding no appearance of either intestine or omentum, he doubted at first
for a moment whether the disease was any thing more than a cyst con-
taining water ; but on insinuating his finger into the abdominal ring,
which he did with some difficulty, he found a considerable bag above it.
Upon slitting up the abdominal ring, and the tendon of the external
oblique towards the spine of the ilium, he found a very small convolution
of intestine embraced at the orifice of the hernial bag, which was the
seat of the stricture. He introduced a director, dilated the stricture ;
and this patient did extremely well. In this hernia, it is to be recol-
lected that the stricture is, in almost all cases, at a very considerable
distance above the abdominal ring. I am not aware that I have any
other observations to make on this disease, as it occurs in the female,
and I shall proceed therefore to the consideration of

CONGENITAL HERNIA

This, as you are aware, is usually hernia of the tunica vaginalis testis,
but it does not always happen that hernia of the tunica vaginalis is con-
genital ; it sometimes appears in the adult. The way in which it takes
place may be thus explained : — The tunica vaginalis is open to the
abdomen a little prior to birth, so that a portion of intestine is very
readily admitted into this part. It scarcely ever happens in the young
subject that any thing but intestine is contained in hernia of the tunica
vaginalis, the omentum not reaching so low as the orifice. If the tunica
vaginalis is not closed immediately after the birth of the child, a hernia
will make its appearance. The appearance of this hernia is well known
to nurses ; they make a distinction between what they call a watery and
a windy rupture. Now what they call a watery rupture is hydrocele,
which not uncommonly takes place in very young children ; and what
they term a windy rupture, is hernia congenita. The former is quite
transparent, and, if not congenital, is capable of being returned into the
cavity of the abdomen ; the latter may be returned into the abdomen,
and in so doing you will hear a gurgling noise. It sometimes happens
that the tunica vaginalis, though not closed, will not admit of the de-
scent of a portion of intestine, because (he orifice is extremely small,
and the person will arrive at the age of from twenty to thirty years be-
fore the hernia appears. The descent of a small convolution of intes-
tine is then generally the effect either of relaxation or of some sudden or
disproportion cd exertion. There is a specimen in the collection of a
tunica vaginalis open in the adult ; the opening is sufficient to admit a



ON HERNIA.



229



large bougie, but it does not appear that the person from whom it was
taken ever had hernia. When you meet with a case of hernia of the
tunica vaginalis in the adult, and you ask him how long he has had
hernia, he will tell you for a very short time — from a week or ten days
to two or three months, but that he is perfectly sure he never had it
when a child.

When intestine or omentum has descended into the tunica vaginalis,
reaching to the lower part of the scrotum, the testicle is involved in the
swelling, so that it cannot be distinctly felt. This is a distinguishing
mark between congenital hernia, or hernia of the tunica vaginalis, and
common hernia ; the former is much more concealed and buried in the
surrounding parts. In the latter, the coverings of the hernia, namely,
the fascia of the cord and the cremaster are thin ; but the tunica vagi-
nalis being thicker than the peritoneum, the parts are not so readily dis-
tinguishable in hernia of the tunica vaginalis as in the common hernia.
The testicle is, besides, considerably diminished in size in the latter spe-
cies of hernia, in consequence of the pressure on the sac preventing the
free circulation of the blood-vessels in that part. In hernia of the
tunica vaginalis, the spermatic cord is not unfrequently altered in its
direction, the artery and vein being on one side, and the vas deferens
situated posteriorly in the outer part. Here is a beautiful specimen
(exhibiting it to the class) illustrating this case. It not unfrequently
happens, in this species of hernia, that the testicle does not descend
completely into the scrotum, and the peritoneal sac descends lower than
the situation of the testicle.

When the hernia is in a reducible state, and a child is brought to you
whose testicle is situated above the abdominal ring, you should advise
the parent on no account to apply a truss, but to let the hernia extend
itself until it has gradually brought down the testicle into the scrotum,
and then, and not till then, to apply a truss. Many years ago, a gen-
tleman brought his child to me with hernia, whose testicle had not
descended, and asked me what was to be done. I told him, if a truss
were applied, it would press upon the testicle, waste, and at length de-
stroy it; but if the hernia were suffered to increase till the testicle was
brought down into the scrotum, there was but little risk of its being
strangulated in very young subjects, and when the testicle had de-
scended, it would be the proper time to apply a truss. This gentleman
brought his son to me when he was nineteen years of age ; his testicle
had then descended, and a truss was applied, which kept it below the
abdominal ring. I am happy to say that this patient, who now holds
a distinguished situation, has taken to himself a wife, and produced to
himself a numerous progeny. When you are therefore consulted under



x



230



ON HERNIA.



such circumstances, this is the plan, gentlemen, which I recommend
you to pursue. You will be consulted in cases of hernia congenita as
to the time at which a truss should be worn : a truss which springs may
be applied when the child is three months old. The reason why a truss
has not been applied sooner is, that the parts are kept in so wet a state
that a truss is very speedily destroyed. However, this reason no longer
exists ; for an ingenious truss has been constructed by Messrs. Sal-
mon and Ody ; which may be worn almost immediately — within a fort-
night at least— after the birth of the child. The pressure should be
extremely light; in general, you should recommend the parent, at
first, to have a truss made in the form of the common spring-truss,
without any spring. A pad, retained by a leathern strap should be
placed upon the hernia, fastened round the abdomen of the child ; and
another strap should be passed between its thighs. While the child is
kept in the horizontal position in the arms, the hernia will, in general,
be prevented from descending ; and, at the end of three months, a truss
may be borne with ease.

With respect to the congenital hernia, in the irreducible state, I do
not know that any particular treatment can be adopted different from
that which is practised in the common inguinal hernia. The operation
in strangulated hernia of the tunica vaginalis is more difficult than that
in the common hernia, the parts in the former being more concealed and
involved in thicker parietes than in the latter. When you make your
incision on the sac, you should take care not to open the tunica vagi-
nalis low down, for two very obvious reasons : first, because you should
always have sufficient tunica vaginalis to cover the testicle, to prevent
any unnecessary irritation ; and secondly, because the spermatic artery
and vein are situated obliquely on the fore part, and you would be in
danger of cutting through each of these. You should therefore leave
three inches of the tunica vaginalis undivided below. In general a consi-
derable quantity of water is found with the intestine in the tunica vagi-
nalis, a much greater quantity than in the common hernia ; because the
tuuica vaginalis is a more secreting surface than the peritoneum. In
congenital hernia the stricture is generally about an inch and a half
above the abdominal ring. When the hernia is very large, the seat of
stricture will descend to within half an inch or an inch of the abdomi-
nal ring ; but this very rarely happens. I have already endeavoured to
expose to you the falsity of those statements which place the seat of
stricture at the abdominal ring. Every surgeon, who has operated five
times in inguinal hernia, and knows any thing of the anatomy of the
human body and of practical surgery, must be aware that the stricture
is hardly ever to be found at the abdominal ring. In hernia congenita,



ON HERNIA.



231



it is even less frequently to be found in that situation than in common
inguinal hernia. If, therefore, a surgeon is called upon to operate for
strangulated hernia, and expects to find the stricture at the abdominal
ring, he is not fit to perform the operation at all : and if any of you
were to state, in your examination at the College, that the abdominal
ring was the seat of stricture, such a man ought to be immediately
turned back. It is contrary to the truth; and every man, who has dis-
sected the disease, and understands anatomy, must know it to be a most
abominable error. I call it to be a most abominable error ; because it
necessarily leads to the most dangerous consequences in the operation
for strangulated hernia. A man, who thinks that by slitting up the
abdominal ring he can push the intestines into the abdomen, either fails
in doing it altogether, or if he gets a portion of intestine within the ring,
the stricture and all the dangerous symptoms of strangulation still re-
main. You will look for the stricture, therefore, in congenital hernia,
at an inch or an inch and a half above the abdominal ring, and directly
opposite to the tendon of the transversalis muscle. I am not aware of
any circumstance in this operation which differs from that adopted in
the common inguinal hernia. When the intestine adheres generally
to the tunica vaginalis, all you are to do is to divide the stricture, and
leave the intestine within the tunica vaginalis. If the adhesion is only
in a particular point, you might cut through it ; but you must not at-
tempt to cut through any considerable portion of the tunica vaginalis,
as you would run great risk of dividing the spermatic artery or vein.
All you should do, after dividing the stricture, is to bring the edges of
the wound together, and make them adhere ; in this way you leave the
patient as you found him, with his irreducible hernia, but relieved from
the dangerous symptoms of strangulation. The patient should wear a
laced bag-truss after the operation.

There is a particular species of hernia of the tunica vaginalis, of
which I have hitherto seen but three examples ; there are two specimens
in the College, and one I shall now send round to you. This is an en-
cysted hernia of the tunica vaginalis ; and I shall endeavour to explain
to you the way in which it takes place. The hernia in this case is very
much concealed within the scrotum ; a bag is situated within the tunica
vaginalis, which is not formed by peritoneum, but is a cyst produced in
the following manner : — Opposite to the situation of the abdominal
ring adhesion takes place between the sides of the tunica vaginalis, and
a pouch is formed leading into the tunica vaginalis. A stricture crosses
the bag directly opposite to the abdominal ring, shutting it up ; and as
the intestine descends into the upper part of the bag, the adhesion be-
comes elongated, and at length a sac is produced. The case from which



232



ON HERNIA.



this preparation was taken I had an opportunity of seeing at the other
hospital. The patient was under the care of Mr. Forster ; he came to the
hospital with symptoms of strangulation, but the hernia was extremely
concealed. He was frequently persuaded to submit to the operation for
strangulated hernia, but he constantly refused, and chose rather to die
than to undergo the operation. On examination of the body after
death, it was found that a cyst had formed, containing a convolution of
intestine, which became strangulated at the orifice, and was the cause
of death. There was a quantity of water in the cyst ; the stricture was
just at the mouth of the adhesion in the tunica vaginalis.

OF FEMORAL HERNIA.

Before I proceed to describe to you the operation for femoral hernia,
I shall demonstrate to you on the dead subject the anatomy of the
parts concerned in this species of hernia. The superficial fascia of the
abdominal muscles is given off 1 by the tendon of the external oblique,
which descends upon the spermatic cord, and is united to the edge of the
abdominal ring in its descent. This structure, which is of considerable
density, is continued to the thigh, and forms a covering of femoral
hernia. The absorbent vessels and superficial veins are kept within
their boundaries by this fascia. From Poupart’s ligament two portions
of fascia pass upwards, the fascia transversalis and the fascia iliaca. In
cutting through the fascia lata a second portion of fascia will be found
to be given off" from the back part of Poupart's ligament, which forms
the sheath of the femoral artery and vein, which are separated from each
other by a septum. The anterior crural nerve has no connexion with
the sheath, but form the boundary of the sheath on the outer side.
It is into this sheath that femoral hernia descends. It begins to de-
scend between the border of Gimbernat’s ligament, which is the lower
edge of Poupart’s; the femoral artery being on the outer side, and the
vein on the inner. The sheath becomes elongated when femoral hernia
is produced, and it is turned over Poupart’s ligament ; so that the lower
part of the hernia is doubled on the upper part, and its mouth is just op-
posite the fundis or basis.

LECTURE XXXI.

OPERATION FOR FEMORAL HERNIA.

At the conclusion of the last lecture, I described to you the parts con-
nected with femoral hernia, and the course in which it descends; I shall
now resume femoral hernia, show the operation for it, and conclude the
subject of hernia.



ON HERNIA.



233



When the peritoneum which covers the femoral hernia is protruded,
it descends on the inside of the femoral vein, and is received on the in-
side of the crural sheath. Before the hernia protrudes, it elongates the
sheath, which forms a covering for it. When femoral hernia protrudes,
it descends on the inside of the epigastric artery ; and there is only the
danger of wounding this vessel, in the operation of cutting upwards
and outwards ; recollect, then, that the epigastric artery is to the iliac
side of the hernia. In the male subject, the spermatic artery crosses on
the fore part of the tumour, but at such a distance from the place where
the stricture is situated, that there is little danger of wounding it in the
operation for femoral hernia. A man must be very badly acquainted
with the nature of the parts, or the principle of the operation, to carry
his incision so high up ; there i3 no necessity for it ; a very slight touch
of the stricture with the knife will be quite sufficient to allow of the
return of the parts. Remember, however, that on the fore part of the
tumour, above Poupart’s ligament, covered in the inguinal canal, is the
spermatic artery, which ought never to be in danger of being wounded.
On the inner side is situated Gimbernat’s ligament ; on the outer side are
the femoral vessels ; there is also situated near the mouth of the hernial
sac, but to the outer side, the epigastric artery. The part through
which femoral hernia protrudes is the opening left in the fascia lata , to
give passage to the absorbent vessels, and the vena saphena. The
femoral hernia is not behind this fascia, but protrudes through the
opening, and is then situated on its fore part ; the crural sheath is car-
ried before it, becomes elongated, and always forms a bag for the
hernia.

The appearances of femoral hernia are such as to require considera-
ble knowledge to discriminate them from those presented by other
complaints : it has the situation of bubo ; in some subjects it is small
and very little moveable, and projects very slightly. Femoral hernia
may be confounded with other diseases, I assure you ; therefore, all the
circumstances connected with it should be particularly attended to.
Now, gentlemen, if you dissect a femoral hernia to ascertain the ap-
pearances that are to be found, you will see, first, after laying open the
skin, a structure which I described to you in the last lecture, the super-
ficial fascia, d few absorbent vessels will also be seen : in consequence
ot the pressure of the hernia, the fascia is distinctly observable to the
eye, and is a structure of considerable density. Secondly, when you
have cut through this fascia, the sheath of the femoral vessels becomes
exposed ( fascia propria ), forming a complete bag, so as to close the
hernia, let its size be what it may. Here is a femoral hernia (exhibiting
a specimen to the class) with a sheath covering it, and which may be

x 2



234



ON HERNIA.



easily separated from its surface. Thirty years ago I did not know of
the existence of this structure. Mr. Weston, a gentleman to whom I
am indebted for a great many opportunities for pursuing morbid anato-
my, sent for me one day to examine a person who had died of strangu-
lated femoral hernia. After dissecting through the superficial fascia, I
thought that I had come to the peritoneal sac. I cut through the struc-
ture, it was of considerable density ; but on examination I found it was
not the peritoneum, but the crural sheath ; I then arrived at the peri-
toneal sac, after having first cut through the integuments, superficial
fascia, in operating for femoral hernia. After having cut through the
superficial fascia, in operating for femoral hernia, you will find in some
subjects a quantity of fat. In the last case, gentlemen, operated on at
these hospitals, after the opening was made through the superficial
fascia, the surgeon said, “ Here is omentum but, on examining
more particularly, he found that he had not opened the hernial eac, and
then discovered that the substance mistaken for omentum was fat.
There are two sacs of the same form covering femoral hernia; the first
consisting of the elongation of the crural sheath, the second of the peri-
toneal covering. Every case of femoral hernia will be found to have a
bag or covering, formed of the crural sheath, except when the hernia
has been so large that it has given way. Year after year I have met
with cases of femoral hernia, and never found one but had a distinct
covering, formed by an elongation of the crural sheath. The peritoneal
sac being exposed, an opening is to be made into it, and the finger intro-
duced towards the cavity of the abdomen, to ascertain the seat of stric-
ture. The finger sometimes cannot be got within the femoral ring (at
which point the stricture is situated), and then a director merely must
be used. Such is the difficulty in femoral hernia of getting any instru-
ment beneath the stricture.

Femoral hernia is subject to very little variety. I have seen a case
where the hernia had acquired such a size that the sides of the sac had
given way, and it protruded to a great distance from Poupart’s liga-
ment. This only happens in those cases where the hernia is very large.
Another variety is, when the obturator artery arises from the epigastric,
and surrounds the sac. Dr. Barclay, a gentleman of great respectability
in his profession, and possessed of extensive anatomical knowledge,
was so kind as to send me a specimen of femoral hernia, in which the
obturator, arising from the epigastric, passed over the front of the sac.
But although the obturator not unfrequently arises from the epigastric,
it rarely passes over the front of the hernial sac, but goes behind it to
the obturator foramen. Another case of this kind fell under the notice
of Mr. Wardrop, whilst travelling on the continent. Excepting these



ON HERNIA.



235



varieties, I have met with no other; the course is the. same. Other
varieties have been said to occur, but I have never met with them, nor
do I believe they are ever found;

Now, gentlemen, we shall proceed to speak of the treatment of femoral
hernia; and, first, the

TREATMENT OF REDUCIBLE FEMORAL HERNIA.

The truss required for this kind of hernia is different from that which
will do in inguinal hernia.

The pad should be at right angles to the spring, placed lower down
than in inguinal hernia, so as to cover the crural 3heath, and the
space through which the hernia protrudes.

The truss I mentioned in the last lecture is sometimes used, but it
does not answer quite so well as the truss I have just alluded to, as it is
likely to arise from its place. The truss that ought to be worn is a
right-angled truss, i. e. with the pad at right angles to the spring. But
I must state to you, that femoral hernia is rarely cured by the applica-
tion of a truss ; it is right that I should recommend this plan of treat-
ment to your attention, and that it should, in some cases, be steadily
persevered in ; but, generally speaking, it fails to accomplish the object
in view ; and the reason is this, that Poupart’s ligament supports the
pressure of the truss, and great strength is required, so that the truss
shall bear on the hernia. I have seen a child of two years old have a
truss applied for femoral hernia ; it has been steadily worn till it was
twelve years of age, when the hernia was in the same state as before the
application of the truss. A truss, however, should be worn, to prevent
the farther descent of any of the parts, but the result is generally less
successful than in inguinal hernia.

TREATMENT OF IRREDUCIBLE FEMORAL HERNIA.

In this complaint, it will be right to wear a truss, as I mentioned on
the last evening, with a hollow in the pad, so as to receive the hernia,
and confine it. A gentleman, with an irreducible femoral hernia, con-
taining omentum, consulted me. 1 recommended a truss, with a de-
pression in the pad, so that the hernia should be received into a cup,
and the sides of the sac be gently pressed. Two years after this I saw
my patient, and I inquired how his hernia was ; he told me that I
should be surprised to hear that it was quite gone. This I doubted :
he went home with me, and on examination I found that by pressure on
the sides of the hernial sac, most of the omentum had been absorbed,
and that little remained. In the treatment of irreducible femoral hernia,



236



ON HERNIA.



the truss is to be applied, and if the hernial sac contains omentum, there
will be a chance of its being absorbed.

TREATMENT OF STRANGULATED FEMORAL HERNIA.

The symptoms of this complaint are more urgent than those of stran-
gulated inguinal hernia ; and the reason is, that the orifice through
which the femoral hernia protrudes is smaller, and the pressure conse-
quently greater. The patient complains of more pain than in inguinal
hernia, and rarely lives so long (if the stricture remain) as a person un-
der the same circumstances with the other kinds of hernia. I have
known a patient die seventeen hours only after the hernia (femoral) had
become strangulated. With strangulated inguinal hernia, I have known
patients live a week; in femoral, they generally survive four days, if
the stricture remain ; but I have also known them die in so short a
space as seventeen hours.

Suppose you were called to a case of strangulated femoral hernia,
how would you proceed ? — You would first resort to the taxis; the pa-
tient must be placed on the bed, with the shoulders elevated, the knees
bent at right angles to the body, and approximated to each other, so as
to admit an arm only between; theh you employ pressure on the hernia.
The hernia is to be pressed directly downwards, in order to get it below
Poupart’s ligament; if you press it upwards, without having first done
this, you will merely get it farther above the ligament. It must first
be brought below the level of Poupart’s ligament, and then kneaded be-
tween the fingers, and pressed upwards. The form of femoral is dif-
ferent, as I explained to you, from that of inguinal hernia. JBy this
drawing (here the learned professor drew a diagram of the state of the
parts) you see that the body of femoral hernia is turned upwards and
forwards over the neck, and nearly at right angles to it above Poupart’s
ligament, and it would be mere folly to press it upwards till it has first
been brought downwards, as the hernia would only be doubled the more
on itself. Having failed in your attempt at the taxis, you employ the
tobacco injection, bleed the patient, and use the warm bath. No time,
however, is to be lost in femoral, as there is less chance of reducing it
than in inguinal hernia. These means failing, you must resort to the
operation ; it is a case in which delay occasions much mischief.

I will now show you, as far as I am able, the operation for femoral
hernia, but we shall not have the same advantages now as on the other
occasion. Not having a femoral hernia to perform the operation on, I
have introduced a piece of intestine under Poupart’s ligament, and
formed a hernia, which, I believe, will answer the purpose.



OX HERNIA.



237



In operating for femoral hernia, you make the first incision in the
course of Poupart’s ligament, along the tumour, extending from one side
to the other ; the second you make at right angles to the first, towards
the umbilicus, so that the two incisions resemble the letter j, inverted ;
the angular flaps are to be next dissected off, and reflected, so as to allow
of greater room. By this incision you expose the superficial fascia,
which you next divide, and the hernial bag, called by some fascia pro-
pria . , is brought into view. This is next cut through, and the hernial sac,
or peritoneal covering makes its appearance. I will relate to you a case
which shows what happens when a person is unacquainted with the struc-
ture of the parts. Many years ago a patient had symptoms of strangulated
femoral hernia, which required operation; I met with the medical man,
the next day, who operated, and asked him how he had succeeded ; he
stated that he had had great difficulty. The fact was, that he had not been
aware of the existence of the crural sheath, which he had mistaken for
the peritoneal covering, and that the hernia was returned into the abdo-
men, together with its sac. The femoral vein was wounded in the
operation, which also greatly confused the parts. The symptoms re-
mained the same, and on the following day the patient died. On exa-
mination, it was found that the hernia had been returned into the ab-
domen without the hernial sac ever being cut through ; and this arose in
consequence of the surgeon not being aware of the existence of the
crural sheath.

The next point is to make an incision into the hernial sac, with the
greatest possible care, and then introduce a director to ascertain the seat
of stricture. Now, gentlemen, having opened the hernial sac, and ex-
posed the intestine, the circumstance to be determined is, in what direc-
tion are you to divide the stricture : there is only one mode that I
would advise you to adopt in practice, and that is, divide the stricture
directly upwards and inwards a little inclined towards the umbilicus.

I will first show you how the stricture is to be divided, and then point
out the objections to the plan. After introducing the director, a bis-
toury, blunted at the point, is to be put on it, and placed against the
stricture ; in this way there is no danger of wounding the intestine.
The bistoury is to be gently raised, and with a slight touch of the in-
strument, the fibres will give way, and the intestine readily return into
the abdomen. But it has been recommended to cut in the direction of
Gimbernat s ligament, towards the symphysis pubis ; there will be no
necessity for this, as the stricture is not situated at Gimbernat’s liga-
ment; it is never known to be there. The seat of stricture, in femoral
hernia, is at the crural arch, just where the intestine leaves the abdo-
men ; and when this is slightly divided, the stricture gives way, and by



238



ON HERNIA.



a little pressure the parts are easily returned. I have known Gimber-
nat’s ligament divided, under the supposition that it was the seat of
stricture, whilst the stricture itself has remained undivided, and the
patient died. This shows the folly of stating that Gimbernat’s liga-
ment is the seat of stricture. Whoever dissects a strangulated femoral
hernia will have an opportunity of learning this for himself. Surgeons
will find that the division of Gimbernat’s ligament will not liberate the
stricture, that it will remain the same ; and that the constriction is at
the crural arch. There is a danger in operating for femoral hernia,
where the intestines are doubled up on themselves. A case of this kind
occurred once at one of these hospitals : — One of the gentlemen attend-
ing these institutions came up to me one day, and said that there had
been an operation for femoral hernia, and that the intestine had been
cut into ; I inquired how this happened, and was informed, that the
mouth of the hernial sac being divided, the parts did not return ; the
division was made still farther, and the knife was introduced two or three
times ; till at last feculent matter came from the wound — the intestines
having given way. I was aware the opportunity for examining the part
would soon arrive — one satisfaction at least that there is from a bad
case, by which we may learn our faults, and gather information to guide
us in similar cases. On examining this patient, it was found that two
convolutions of the intestines had been cut by the knife, just at the
mouth of the hernial sac, and that Gimbernat’s ligament had been divided.
Persons, who think the stricture is at Gimbernat’s ligament are grossly
ignorant of its real seat, and I can scarcely tell how to express my con-
tempt for those who resist the evidence of their senses. I have my feelings
on the subject, other persons have theirs ; but it is my duty to state
to you my views on this complaint ; if I did not relate the result of my
experience, of what use has been my lecturing here for thirty-two years ?
and for what purpose have I attended hospital practice during the space
of forty years ? It is only the opportunities which I have had of watch-
ing disease that makes it worth while to hear me, and that affords me
pleasure in teaching you. [Applause.) I do not mention it to gain
your approbation, but to enforce on your minds that nothing will avail
in practice but the tact which is gained at the bed-side of the patient,
and that any thing else is of comparatively little importance.

UMBILICAL HERNIA.

Umbilical is next to inguinal hernia in frequency, if not before it ;
it very frequently occurs, but whether more or less so than inguinal, I
am not quite certain. Umbilical hernia is very common in infants soon
after birth, and to these cases you will be most frequently called, in



ON HERNIA.



239



adults, where there is great obesity, in pregnant women and children,
this complaint is often found. In infants it will soon be recognized by
the situation of the cord. Recollect the anatomy of the part, that there
is an opening in the lined alba and the peritoneum lines it internally.
When a hernia takes place, this opening does not close ; the peritoneum
equally lines it with the other parietes of the abdomen : when the hernia,
therefore, protrudes, the peritoneum is always carried before it, whether
in youth or advanced age. When the hernia has been very large, I have
seen one or two cases without the sac ; not but there was a sac at the be-
ginning, but the hernia having acquired a very large size, the sac be-
came lacerated or partially absorbed, and the intestine has been thrown
in close contact with the skin. I have seen an umbilical hernia descend
as low down as the upper part of the thigh. This kind of hernia is
covered with a superficial fascia, which, however, often becomes absorbed.
Umbilical hernia is subject to little variety either in form or size. Occa-
sionally there are two bags of intestine, separated by a septum. A
female came to this hospital with strangulated umbilical hernia, was
operated on, and recovered. Some years after she came again, with
another hernia, a little below the spot where the first was, and was
operated on again ; it was found there was a complete septum between
the two. The upper hernial tumour was strangulated at first, the
lower one the last time.

TREATMENT OF REDUCIBLE UMBILICAL HERNIA IN CHILDREN.

The treatment to be pursued in children, is to apply one-half of an
ivory ball on the umbilicus, and over this adhesive plaster and a belt ;
the belt, however, will be of no use unless supported by straps which
come round the lower part of the belly and the thighs. A little waist-
coat fastened by two strings will be of use.

REDUCIBLE UMBILICAL HERNIA IN ADULTS.

In adults, at the beginning, the plan of treatment should be the same
as in children ; but if by means of the ivory ball the hernia should not
be returned within the opening of the umbilicus, a pad, covered with
black silk, and fastened by adhesive plaster, is to be placed over the
part. When the hernia is reducible, a truss should be worn. It will sel-




should be worn, as it affords a shield to the abdomen, where the hernia
is pendulous, and there is much obesity.

The truss that should be worn consists of two broad belts, which
must come round and buckle on the abdomen. But as this is continually






240



ON HERNIA.



liable to change place, a narrow belt joined to the broad one should also
go under the pendulous part of the belly.

IRREDUCIBLE UMBILICAL HERNIA.

A hollowed truss, on the same principle as the one employed in irre-
ducible femoral hernia, should be worn in this complaint. It should
be buckled round the abdomen, and if omentum be contained in the
hernial sac, it will be likely to be diminished in size, and the danger of
the sac bursting will also be prevented. In strangulated umbilical
hernia, before the operation is resorted to, the tobacco clyster should be
employed, as it has a greater effect in relaxing the muscles and taking
away the cause of the stricture in this than any other kind of hernia.
Suppose you were called to a strangulated umbilical hernia, how would
you endeavour to return it ? If it were small, by the hand alone ; but
if it were very large, you must take the bottom or flat surface of a
wooden platter, lay it on the abdomen and press on it. (Here the
learned professor showed the mode of doing it, which excited a smile
throughout the class.) When the pressure has been kept up for some
time, the orifice at the umbilicus becomes dilated, and the hernia returns.
If the hernia is large, the means just mentioned must be used ; if small,
employ the taxis, as in inguinal hernia.

OPERATIONS FOR UMBILICAL HERNIA.

Of all operations for hernia, this is the most simple and most easily
performed ; but it is not one of the most successful — there is the diffi-
culty of obtaining a flap of skin to close the opening. The plan you are
to adopt in operating is to make first an incision across the tumour, and
then another at right angles, so that the whole is like the letter j, in-
verted. The integuments being thus divided, the corners of the incision
are turned to one side, by which means the hernial sac is brought into
view. This being carefully opened, the finger is to be passed to the
orifice of the sac, at the umbilicus, and a blunt-pointed bistoury intro-
duced on it. The stricture is to be divided upwards, in the direction
of the ensiform cartilage. Having returned the intestines, the parts are
to be brought together, and a flap formed from above to cover the
opening. If adhesion of the sides of the wound can be affected, the
danger of peritoneal inflammation will be lessened. Dossils of lint and
adhesive plaster are to be applied over the wound. The after treatment
is the same as for other hernia.



ON HERNIA



241



VENTRAL HERNIA.

I do not know that there is any thing in this kind of hernia requiring
a distinct notice. When it occurs low down, care must be taken, when
operating, of the epigastric artery; but of this your anatomical know-
ledge will put you on your guard. The intestine generally protrudes
either through the openings in the line® semilunares, or line® trans-
versae of the abdomen, which become enlarged.

[Sir Astley concluded by observing, that the diseases of the eye came
next in order, and that Mr. Green would deliver the lectures on those
affections, forming a series of six, after which he should resume the
course, on the subject of Urinary Calculi.]



LECTURE XXXII.

ON THE DISEASES OF THE EYE.

Gentlemen. — In speaking this evening of the diseases of the eye, I
cannot but observe that there seems no good reason why the treatment
of these diseases should be excluded from the general practice of surgery,
for the treatment of these, as of all other diseases, depends on the same
principles of cure; and when diseases of the eye occupy exclusively the
attention of persons calling themselves oculists, they are very apt to be
treated in an empirical manner. It is desirable, therefore, that surgeons
of good general education should direct their attention to this subject.
It has been said, indeed, that they have hitherto paid too little attention
to this part of their professional duties, but I think this reproach is fast
wearing away. In the consideration of this subject I shall first speak
of simple inflammation of the tunica conjunctiva ; then of its modifi-
cations, its consequences, and treatment. I shall next speak of simple
inflammation of the deeper seated tunics, those of the globe of the eye ;
the consequences of such inflammation, and the treatment which it may
be proper to adopt. Thirdly, I shall describe the diseases of the lens,
and particularly that disease of the crystalline lens which terminates in
cataract, and the operation which it is necessary to perform for that dis-
ease. Lastly, I shall speak of the diseases of the appendages of the eye,
their treatment, and the operations required for their cure. In this
evening’s lecture I shall confine myself to

INFLAMMATION OF THE TUNICA CONJUNCTIVA.

And first of simple inflammation of the conjunctiva.

This, however, may be divided, like other inflammations, into acute

Y



242



ON INFLAMMATION



and chronic. The symptoms of inflammation of the conjunctiva do not
differ from those of inflammation of other parts of the body, except in
so far as they are modified by the structure of the part, and by the
function of the organ. Indeed the change which takes place in inflam-
mation of the conjunctiva may be regarded as a very beautiful instance
and illustration of the change which takes place by the process of in-
flammation in general. I have only to premise, before speaking of the
symptoms, that the inflammation may exist in various degrees, from
the slightest degree of excitement up to inflammation of the most violent
and intense character.

Tlie first symptom is redness of the part : which is very remarkable,
because the blood naturally conveyed by the vessels to this part is co-
lourless. Under any existing irritation, the vessels are distinctly ob-
servable, and become injected by red blood. When the irritation con-
tinues, the vessels become still more apparent, and at length all the
interlacements and anastomoses of the vessels of the conjunctiva partake
of the inflammation, and present almost one uniform appearance of
redness. During this time more or less pain is experienced; at first,
as the vessels become filled, an uneasy sensation is felt ; this increases,
and at length, upon the admission of light, a sharp lancinating pain is
experienced : the patient is under the necessity of keeping the eye closed,
and, indeed, has some difficulty in raising it, not only from the pain he
suffers, but from the degree of fulness and swelling with which it is
accompanied. This pain goes on increasing, and at length the patient
complains of a burning heat, and a sensation as if some extraneous body
were lodged in the conjunctiva : a sort of grating between the conjunc-
tiva and the lid. At this time the admission of the least light or air
produces such lancinating pain, that the eye is spasmodically closed.
During the first part of the inflammation there is a more abundant se-
cretion of tears, and this generally increases until there is a constant
flow of water from under the lids.

It sometimes happens that, at the highest stage of excitement, this
increased secretion is suddenly diminished, and there is a preternatural
dryness of the eyes, producing painful sensations. A considerable de-
gree of swelling takes place ; the conjunctiva becomes turgid from the
increased quantity of blood admitted by the vessels, and effusion follows.
Although the swelling is pretty equally diffused over the whole surface
of the conjunctiva, it seems to be the greatest at the transparent cornea,
because here the coat is more tightly adherent. The conjunctiva is here
elevated in a circular fold, and this appearance is called chemosis. The
eyelids are in general more or less swollen from the same cause : namely,
the greater determination of blood to the part, and the filling of the



OF THE CONJUNCTIVA.



243



vessels. Not only is pain experienced in the eye from the causes I have
mentioned, but also a sense of weight and fulness in the globe of the
eye, as if the ball were too large for the socket. The neighbouring
parts also, the forehead and temples, partake of the pain ; there will be
a shooting pain to the maxillary bone, or more deeply seated in the
head ; these pains are in some instances extremely violent. This train
of symptoms is attended with a greater or less degree of constitutional
irritation. The patient complains of great lassitude, prostration of
strength, chilliness, or rigor followed by heats. His skin will often be
hot and dry, and his pulse quick and hard ; his stomach will be affected,
and nausea or vomiting produced ; he will often complain of pain in
the back, and in short of all the symptoms which indicate a considerable
fever of the sympathetic kind, arising from local irritation. The degree
in which these symptoms occur will of course vary according to the
constitution of the patient. In young and robust persons there will
often be a high degree of local inflammation, without much constitu-
tional irritation ; while, on the other hand, in delicate and irritable
patients, a much less, nay sometimes a very trifling degree of local in-
flammation will be accompanied with violent symptoms of constitutional
derangement. Accordingly, although, cceleris paribus, the degree of
constitutional irritation will be proportional to the degree of local ex-
citement, this principle will be so much modified by the particular con-
stitution of the patient, that in cases where, from the violence of the
inflammation, much constitutional derangement might be expected, very
little will occur ; and vice versa, where, from the slight degree of local
excitement, very little might be expected, it will sometimes happen that
a great degree of constitutional irritation will attend it. So much for
the symptoms of ophthalmia, as existing in simple inflammation of the
conjunctiva, without any particular modification. It will not be neces-
sary to point out particularly the predisposing causes of this complaint,
because they do not differ from the predisposing causes of inflammation
in any other part of the body. I shall only mention, therefore, some
of the causes which most frequently produce irritation in the eye, ar.d
lead to inflammation of the conjunctiva. Any extraneous body lodging
in the conjunctiva will produce this effect; and this is so frequently
the cause of inflammation, that it will be right in all cases carefully to
examine its surface, in order to ascertain whether there is any extraneous
body in it, such as a particle of dust or sand, a piece of grit or lime, or
any of the scoria; which often fly off from iron while it is beaten on the
anvil. Any extraneous body of this kind will readily produce irritation,
and inflammation of the conjunctiva. Variation of temperature, espe-
cially when accompanied with any sudden access of light, will produce



244



ON INFLAMMATION



this inflammation. Thus it has often happened that persons who have
gone out of a warm room to look at fire-works have been attacked with
it. The change of temperature, together with the brilliant light to which
the eye is exposed, seem to produce it. Persons sitting in a hot room,
or a theatre where there is much light, and exposed at the same time to
a draft of cold air, have often had inflammation of the conjunctiva. So
particular states of the atmosphere will become in some degree excitants
of this inflammation, and it has been observed to be more frequent
during the prevalence of easterly winds. There seems to be some ground
for this opinion. Other causes of this inflammation may exist, but it
is not necessary to enumerate them more at large. The principal causes
are, the admission of any extraneous body and variations of temperature,
especially if accompanied by intense heat and light, or partial exposure
to drafts of cold air. I have said that this inflammation is either acute
or chronic, let us consider in what the chronic stage of it consists. The term
chronic is not, as its etymology would lead you to suppose, applied merely
with reference to duration of time; it is not only applied to signify that
state of congestion and debility of vascular action produced by the acute
stage, but it is also applied to that state of inflammation which from
the commencement has a character of atony and debility. As this is
the more frequent form in which you will find this inflammation, whe-
ther primary or following the acute stage, it is necessary to attend par-
ticularly to the symptoms by which it is distinguished, as the mode of
treatment is very different from that which is required in acute inflam-
mation. The symptoms of chronic differ from those of acute inflam-
mation of the conjunctiva rather in degree than in kind ; so that after
they have existed for some time in the acute stage, you find the disease
gradually passing into the chronic stage. The redness will be less
intense, the pain which accompanied it less acute, the intolerance of
light will be less, the chemosis and swelling will be diminished, the
effusion of tears less considerable, the constitutional irritation will in a
great degree have subsided, and, in short, all the acute symptoms will
be much mitigated. There will still, however, remain a considerable
degree of irritability in the eye, on exposure to light ; some artificial
defence to exclude the light will be necessary, and the person will still
be incapable of applying the organ to the ordinary purposes of vision.
The cause of chronic inflammation, both exciting and predisposing, are
very similar to those of acute inflammation, and indeed I have already
said that one form very commonly passes into the other ; but at the
same time it is to be remembered that there are many causes which
tend to produce this inflammation, accompanied with atony and debility
in the very outset, which distinguish it from acute ophthalmia. Chronic



OF THE CONJUNCTIVA.



245



inflammation of the conjunctiva is very apt to take place, where the
patient has for a long time been labouring under disorder of the diges-
tive organs. Patients who have this form of the inflammation often
complain of dyspeptic symptoms ; such as uneasiness about the scro-
biculus cordis ; distention of the stomach after eating ; flatulence, dis-
agreeable tastes in the mouth, bitter, sour or putrid ; furred tongue,
and other symptoms indicating derangement of the digestive organs.
Inflammation of this kind is very apt to arise from, or to be kept up by,
exposure to acrid fumes or smoke in particular trades. It is not un-
frequently the concomitant of dentition, the measles, or small pox ; it
sometimes accompanies rheumatism and gout. Frequent intoxication
and various other causes may predispose to it, which it will be neces-
sary to investigate carefully, because the mode of treatment will ma-
terially depend upon them, as I shall have occasion to show you in
another part of the lecture.

In general, inflammation of the conjunctiva is a very manageable
complaint. It passes into chronic inflammation after the acute stage
has continued for a certain time, and it not unfrequently subsides of
itself. A spontaneous cure, however, is by no means to be depended
upon, and we ought on no account to neglect or relax in the proper
mode of treatment, from any reliance upon such a cure ; because sim-
ple inflammation of this membrane may lead to inflammation of the
deeper-seated tunics of the globe of the eye ; suppuration may be in-
duced, the organ may at length become permanently disorganized, and
the sight of the eye irretrievably lost. The consequences of inflamma-
tion of this membrane are very similar to those of inflammation in other
parts of the body. It sometimes terminates in effusion, the serum or
blood under the conjunctiva rising in a roll above the transparent
cornea. It sometimes produces the adhesive process ; and when it ter-
minates in this manner the adhesive matter is deposited under the con-
junctiva, which covers the transparent cornea, and is recognized by a
hazy appearance at the part. The adhesion is various, both in its ex-
tent and quantity ; it is sometimes so slight as only to produce a sim-
ple clouded appearance over a certain part of the cornea, which is tech-
nically called nebula ; it is at other times more considerable in quantity,
and produces an appearance of considerable opacity in the cornea,
which is usually called albugo, or leucoma. The deposit of matter is
sometimes confined to a simple speck, and is sometimes spread more or
less over the whole surface of the cornea, so as to interrupt or intercept
vision altogether. The inflammation sometimes proceeds to the suppu-
rative process; indeed the tunica conjunctiva appears to be of a nature
very analogous to the mucous membranes of the body, and like these,

y 2



246



ON INFLAMMATION



is exceedingly prone to the suppurative stage of inflammation. The
suppuration generally proceeds from the surface of the conjunctiva, as
from the surface of any mucous membrane in a state of inflammation.
In other instances, the formation of pus is circumscribed ; a deposit of
lymph takes place where the conjunctiva covers the cornea, or in its im-
mediate vicinity, and a little abscess or pustule arises from the centre.
Ulceration is also sometimes produced this usually occurs in the cor-
nea, in consequence of laying open this pustule, probably from the de-
nudation or exposure of the cornea. Lastly, sloughing and mortifica-
tion of the cornea is not an uncommon effect of a high degree of suppu-
rative inflammation. The same consequences, therefore, occasionally
arise from inflammation of the conjunctiva as from inflammation in other
parts of the body; namely, effusion, adhesion, suppuration, ulceration,
and mortification. As the most serious consequences, therefore, often
follow from simple inflammation of this membrane, let us consider the
mode of treatment which we ought, under such circumstances, to pursue.

OF THE TREATMENT OF SIMPLE INFLAMMATION OF THE
CONJUNCTIVA.

It will be necessary to adopt at once, with vigour, the antiphlogistic
plan of treatment. As the best mode of diminishing the action of the
heart and arteries, the use of the lancet should be freely resorted to, in
the commencement of inflammation of the conjunctiva. You ought
not to be satisfied with taking away a certain quantity of blood ; as, for
instance, eight, ten, or sixteen ounces ; but you should in this, as in
all other cases of acute inflammation, accompanied with hardness of the
pulse, make a free orifice in a large vein, and take away a quantity of
blood, until some manifest effect is produced upon the action of the
heart and arteries ; keep your finger on the pulse of the patient, in order
to ascertain how the heart is affected, and carry on the bleeding even to
faintness. This may prevent the necessity of again having recourse to
the lancet ; or if it should be necessary to do so, blood may be taken
away in much smaller quantities. You will, of course, be guided by
the state of the patient’s pulse, as the only certain criterion; and
when this is diminished, leeches may be afterwards conveniently ap-
plied.

The application of leeches, in the first instance, except in large num-
bers, is seldom sufficient in acute inflammation ; three or four leeches
will scarcely produce any effect upon it. Opening the temporal artery
is another mode of bleeding, which is attended with very good effects in
this inflammation. This practice has been decried by some persons,
who suppose that by opening the temporal artery you force the blood to



OF THE CONJUNCTIVA.



247



pass through the anastomosing branches, and in this way throw more
blood into those vessels which are immediately distributed to the eye.
Whether this be the case or not I am not prepared to determine, but I
have certainly seen good effects from opening the temporal artery in
this inflammation, and I am therefore often inclined to adopt this prac-
tice. Some practitioners recommend the practice of dividing the vessels
of the part by scarifying the conjunctiva. This is a practice, however,
which I do not recommend : the quantity of blood taken in this way is
small ; the irritation produced in performing the operation is consider-
able, and the clots of blood left after it often excite or keep up inflam-
mation of the conjunctiva. Great benefit is derived from treatment
directed more especially to the body at large ; such, for instance, as dia-
phoretic medicines. The tartrite of antimony is a very useful medicine
of this kind ; perhaps there is no medicine which, after blood-letting,
tends so effectually to keep down the action of the heart and arteries. It
should be given in such doses, and repeated at such intervals, as to keep
up a state of nausea. Purgative medicines are thought by some per-
sons to be not at all necessary in this inflammation. Richter, a very
valuable writer on surgery, is of this opinion ; and I am quite surprised
at it, for mud; benefit will undoubtedly arise from evacuating the
bowels of any accumulation of feculent matter. Constitutional irrita-
tion will be materially abated by keeping up the secretions from the
intestines, and, in many cases, by altering and rendering them more
healthy. The bowels should therefore be freely acted upon by doses of
calomel, combined with jalap, scammony, or cathartic extract ; and the
effects of these medicines should be kept up by the exhibition of neutral
salts, so as to produce a considerable number of watery stools. At the
same time the diet of the patient should be low, and he should be kept
in a state of perfect rest and quietude. When an impression has been
made in this way on the symptoms, it will then be proper to adopt
other plans of treatment ; for instance, where blood has been taken to a
considerable extent, the application of a blister to the nape of the neck
will be attended with beneficial effects. The treatment of the part is
also to be considered ; the head should be kept raised, so as to favour a
return of the blood from the eyes, and the access of air or light should
also be prevented by keeping the room darkened. When I say that the
access of air should be prevented, I do not mean that the room should
not be kept well ventilated, for this is a very material point, but only that
the patient should not be exposed to variations of temperature. With
respect to local applications, I believe it will in general be found that
moist warmth is most agreeable to the patient in acute inflammation of
the conjunctiva. This may be applied in the way of fomentations,



248



ON INFLAMMATION



either by means of tepid water, or decoctions of marsh-mallows, poppy-
heads, or camomile flowers. Where there is much irritability, steam
will often be found useful, and especially the steam of water in which
opium has been infused, from which the patient will experience great
relief. Some persons recommend a sort of poultice, although from the
tumefaction of the lids, this is an application which cannot be very con-
veniently used. The poultice, of course, is not of the ordinary descrip-
tion ; it is generally made of camomile flowers, boiled so as to be ren-
dered extremely soft, and put into a gauze or muslin bag, which should
be applied so as to make a very slight degree of pressure on the eye. If
poultices are employed, they should be very frequently changed, for
otherwise they are very apt to confine the secretions, and rather to
keep up than diminish irritation. Fomentations, however, such as I
before described, are greatly preferable. Many persons prefer cold to
warm applications ; if cold applications are employed, care must be
taken that they do not stimulate the part. The choice of cold or warm
applications should depend entirely on the feelings of the patient ; if he
do not find relief from warm, you should then try the effect of cold ap-
plications. I have found, however, that in general moist warmth has a
tendency to produce relaxation of the vessels, and to favour the passing
of the acute into the chronic stage of inflammation. Warm applications,
however, must not be continued when the chronic stage has commenced,
for they would then do mischief instead of good. On this account,
you should observe attentively the change of the inflammation from
the acute to the chronic stage, that you may alter your plan of treat-
ment as soon as the latter stage has commenced. In the chronic stage
the evacuating plan may, to a considerable extent, be laid aside ; the
diet, though still not stimulating, may be more generous ; there will be
no necessity for continuing diaphoretic medicines, as the skin will
generally be sufficiently moist, nor will it be necessary to evacuate
the bowels so freely, though attention should be paid to their due
action ; alterative medicines will often be found beneficial. The
local application should be of an entirely different character; they ought
to be moderately astringent and stimulating, as your object now is to
excite some degree of action in the vessels, and to get rid of their relaxa-
tion and atony, care being taken at the same time not to stimulate the
parts too much. Various collyria or eye- waters are used for this pur-
pose; all of them moderately astringent or stimulating; such as the
solution of alum in water, solutions of the sulphate of zinc, or the sul-
phate of copper, or the liquor plumbi subacetatis. These solutions should
at first be very much diluted ; ten drops of the liquor plumbi subace-
tatis may be added to four or six qijnces of water; a grain of alum, or



OF THE CONJUNCTIVA.



249



half a grain of the sulphate of zinc or copper, may be dissolved in an
ounce of water. The solution should be gradually strengthened, in
proportion to its action on the part and the degree of stimulus which
may be required. To judge how far the stimulus may be carried, the
criterion is exceedingly simple ; if you find that a certain degree of
smarting and pain is produced, which soon subsides, and leaves the
patient much more easy than before, you may be convinced that the colly-
riutn is beneficial ; if, on the other hand, the patient experiences a great
degree of pain, which does not subside speedily, and the vessels become
turgid, you may be assured that thecollyrium is doing harm, and that the
quantity of stimulus ought to be diminished. The best mode of applying
an eye-wash of this kind is to inject it by means of a silver or ivory sy-
ringe, introduced under the lids every two or three hours. In this way
you may be certain that the solution is diffused over the whole surface of
the conjunctiva. An eye-cup will answer the purpose very well, if the
patient, after immersing his eye in the cup, has the courage to open it.
The syringe, however, is a more manageable instrument. Mr. Ware
recommended, in chronic ophthalmia, what in the old pharmacopoeias
used to be called tinctura thebaica. The vinum opii will answer the
same purpose, and seems to be one of the best stimuli which can be
employed in chronic ophthalmia ; it acts as a mild astringent, and at the
same time, by its soothing quality, sheathes the effect of the stimulus,
so that no pain is produced. It may be right, in speaking of collyria,
to say that I have found patients able to bear them stronger when the
chill is taken off from them ; the warmth of the application seems to
take away the pain, while the effect remains the same. The vinum opii
may be employed in the quantity of one drop, or even of two or three
drops, two, three, or four times a-day. It will be best to drop it into
tiie inner canthus of the eye, with a camel-hair pencil ; the patient
should then shut his eye, and move it about, so that the fluid may be
diffused over the whole surface. I have seen this application used two
or three times a-day, and in the case of children, sometimes only once
a-day, with the most decided benefit. There is another circumstance
which should be attended to in the treatment of chronic ophthalmia,
namely, not to exclude the light so much as in acute ophthalmia. If
the patient can bear a moderate degree of light, it should be freely ad-
mitted. He should wear no bandages, and have no other protection
than a shade. Continued darkness and heat are very apt to keep up a
morbid state of sensibility and irritability in the eyes. Lastly, with
respect to the treatment of chronic ophthalmia, I have already stated
various causes which predispose to, in some instances excite, and in
many keep up, this state of the complaint. You must give, therefore,



250



ON PURULENT OPHTHALMIA.



conjointly with those remedies which I have just pointed out, others to
act on the morbid state of the constitution which keeps up the local irri-
tation, and your success in the treatment of this inflammation will very
materially depend on the accuracy with which you investigate the causes
to which I have adverted, and the judgment with which you apply the
remedies.

I shall now proceed to consider the suppurative form of inflammation,
producing,



PURULENT OPHTHALMIA.

Suppurative inflammation of the conjunctiva is the most severe form
of inflammation in that membrane. It is exceedingly acute, very rapid
in its progress, and often very destructive in its ultimate effects. This
form of the complaint requires very active treatment. The symptoms
are so manifest that there can be no doubt of the nature of the com-
plaint, its prominent character being the formation of a considerable
quantity of purulent matter. In other respects the symptoms are not
very different from those which characterize inflammation generally.
The patient at first feels an uneasy sensation about the eyes; next some
degree of pain on the admission of light, which increases to a consider-
able intolerance of light. Redness of the vessels is observed, and besides
this, a greater degree of swelling than commonly attends simple inflam-
mation. The eye-lids soon become much swollen, the conjunctiva,
where it covers the fore part of the globe of the eye, is tumid ; there is
considerable chemosis, and often such turgescence of the upper lid as to
prevent the patient from raising it. The lids are often so much tumefied
as to become everted, so that a sort of roll of the lid is formed. These
are the symptoms which precede the discharge of matter. A fluid first
appears which is not opaque, and has the character of tenacious mucus ;
in the course of twenty-four hours it assumes the appearance of pus. It
is thick, yellow, sometimes green, and poured out in considerable quan-
tity. The appearance of the tunica conjunctiva has been not inaptly
compared to the foetal stomach, when injected. It has the appearance
of a villous membrane highly injected with red blood, and certainly very
nearly resembles the internal surface of the foetal stomach when highly
injected. If you examine it with a glass, you will see drops of pus
oozing on the surface, and collecting there in considerable quantities.
The acute stage of purulent ophthalmia is of very short duration ; it
has a tendency to pass rapidly into the atonic stage, in which there is
action without power, and congestion of the vessels of the part. At
this time the violence of the acute symptoms is mitigated, but the
patient labours under considerable prostration of strength.



ON PURULENT OPHTHALMIA.



251



Purulent ophthalmia has a great tendency also to terminate in slough-
ing. The cause of this tendency it is perhaps not very easy completely
to explain ; Mr. Travers thinks that it is produced by a constriction of
the small vessels distributed to the part of the cornea, in the same way
as sloughing of the glands is produced in paraphymosis by the cutting
off of such vessels. Sometimes the sloughing commences in a small
portion, and gradually lamella after lamella is destroyed, until the aper-
ture assumes a funnel-like shape ; at other times a slough forms in a
considerable portion of the cornea at once, and opens into the anterior
chamber. The commencement of the sloughing process may be recog-
nized by a haziness of the cornea, which soon amounts to considerable
opacity. When you observe a dark appearance beyond the ulcerating
parts running from the deposit of lymph so as to form a surface from
which the chasm is to be filled up, you may regard this as a favourable
sign that the sloughing has here found its limit. The case is not to be
regarded as hopeless when sloughing of the cornea has commenced, for
if the opening be only small, the common effect is that the aqueous hu-
mour will escape ; the iris will become prolapsed into the aperture of
the cornea, but the patient may afterwards recover, and though the
shape of the pupil will be altered, he may still retain a considerable de-
gree of vision. When the opening is large, the iris will not only be
prolapsed, but protruded ; not only the aqueous, but the crystalline
and the vitreous humours will escape, and the sight of the patient will
be irretrievably lost. The causes of purulent ophthalmia are various ; it
is often occasioned by the violent degree of inflammation produced by
some highly irritating substance, such as caustic lime. It occurs occa-
sionally in new-born children? in this case it is doubtful whether it
arises from the first exposure of the eye to the light, or, as is commonly
supposed, from the application of the vaginal secretions to the eyes of
the child on its passage into the world. It generally takes place in the
first week or month after the birth of the child, and seldom later than
three months.

Another, and one of the most violent forms of purulent ophthalmia, is
that which is called gonorrhotal, from its being produced by the appli-
cation of gononhteal matter to the conjunctiva. This of all others pro-
duces the most intense degree of inflammation. It may be readily
traced to the cause I have just stated, in consequence of the person la-
bouring under gonorrhcca inadvertently using a towel, or anything to
which the gonorrhoeal matter has been applied, and thus conveying it to
the part. I am aware that this inflammation has been stated, upon what
may be considered good authority, to be a metastasis of the gonorrhoeal
symptoms from the urethra to the conjunctiva. I have never, however



252



ON PURULENT OPHTHALMIA.



seen a case in which I could entertain the least suspicion that the com-
plaint was produced in that way, and I do not think that there is suffi-
cient evidence to establish such an opinion. There is another form of
ophthalmia, which has been called the epidemic, or Egyptian ; epide-
mic, in consequence of its attacking a number of persons at the same-
time in particular districts ; and Egyptian, because it resembles that
form of ophthalmia with which our troops were attacked in Egypt in
the year 1801. This disease was, however, well known in this and
other countries long before our soldiers went to Egypt, and it has taken
place in districts where there could be no possibility of communication
with those soldiers. There can be no doubt that it arises spontaneously,
and often attacks epidemically a number of persons in the same district.
How it arises it is difficult to say; it was supposed to be produced in
Egypt by the combined effects of heat and dust ; but it is doubtful
whether it may not rather arise from some particular state of the atmos-
phere with which we are not perfectly acquainted. I have only in con-
clusion to speak of the

TREATMENT OF PURULENT OPHTHALMIA.

If the lancet is to be used in any kind of ophthalmia, it is more espe-
cially to be used, not only boldly, but very early in this. It may be
said, indeed, that unless some decided impression is made on the symp-
toms in the first twenty-four hours, we shall be unable afterwards to
check the progress of the disease. It will be necessary, therefore,
to push blood-letting to a very considerable extent, in an early stage
of this inflammation. Topical bleeding, by the application of leeches,
is quite out of the question in this complaint, except in the case
of children. Blood should be taken in large quantities from the arm of
the patient. The army surgeons, who have had the most extensive
opportunities of witnessing this form of the disease, all concur in the
utility of copious bleeding. All the other antiphlogistic remedies, which
1 before enumerated to you, are to be put in practice in this case. Pur-
gatives should be administered so as to produce a considerable quantity
of watery stools ; diaphoretic medicines, and especially the tartrite of
antimony, in doses of J or ^ a grain, should be given at such intervals
as to keep the patient in a state of nausea, and topical applications
should be employed very much in the same manner as in simple inflam-
mation. During the first stage of the complaint, moist warmth in the
form of fomentations and poultices, such as I have already described,
will be found beneficial. The acute stage, however, is of very short
duration, and they are not to be continued beyond that period. The
extent to which the antiphlogistic plan should be pushed must vary,



ON PURULENT OPHTHALMIA.



253



according to the violence of the complaint and the constitution of the
patient. Young, robust, and plethoric patients will bear depletion to
almost any extent ; on the other hand, you must proceed with more
caution where the patient is of a weakly, debilitated, or irritable habit
of body. You must not, however, be deterred from adopting an active
plan of treatment until you have produced a manifest effect on the sys-
tem of the patient : until the pulse becomes soft ; the skin moist ; the
pain, swelling, tension, and throbbing of the eyes considerably abated ;
the chemosis diminished, and in fact all the acute symptoms more or
less subdued. When this is the case, if you should be called to the com-
plaint in an early stage of it, the subsequent treatment will in general be
very easy. It often happens, however, that we are not called to this com-
plaint until it has arrived at the chronic stage, when the conjunctiva is
feebly pouring out pus, the pulse depressed, the skin cold and clammy,
the countenance sallow, and when the constitution has materially suf-
fered from the progress of the disease. In this state, an entirely different
plan of treatment will be required. Gently stimulating applications
should be employed by means of a syringe, so as to cleanse the con-
junctiva, and free it from the pus which has collected on its surface,
and at the same time stimulate the relaxed vessels. In general it will
be necessary to employ tonic remedies, such as bark, for instance,
always attending to the due action of the bowels, without which tonics
would be useless, and even injurious, to the patient. To children,
bark may be given in the form of extract, to the extent of from two to
five grains, two or three times a-day. The eyes should not be ban-
daged, nor should the matter be allowed to collect ; cleanliness is of
great importance in the treatment of this form of the disease. With
respect to the treatment of the sloughing cornea, some nicety will be
required. When you have ascertained, that the sloughing process is
commencing, from the hazy or opaque appearance of the cornea, the anti-
phlogistic must be changed for a gently stimulating and tonic plan of
treatment. Weak astringent collyria should be used to favour the
throwing off of the sloughs. Observe the process of the sloughing from
time to time : if there is a firm layer beneath, the patient is going on
well, but if the sloughing has a flocculent, soft, ash-coloured appear-
ance, in addition to mild stimulants to the part, you should employ
tonic remedies, such as bark. In the treatment of purulent ophthalmia,
it is of great consequence to pay strict attention to the changes which
take place in the symptoms, so that neither the depleting nor the tonic
plan may be blindly continued. The treatment should be regulated by
the violence of the symptoms, and by the changes which take place as
the disease passes from the acute to the chronic form. The errors in tho



z



254



ON STRUMOUS OPHTHALMIA.



treatment of this complaint may be comprised in two words ; they
consist either in continuing the depleting plan too long, or in not resort,
ing to it sufficiently early. If the antiphlogistic plan be not adopted at
a very early stage of the disease, the tonic treatment will afterwards be
of no service ; and on the other hand, if you continue the depleting plan
too long, you will check the restorative process, and the beneficial effects
which nature would otherwise assist in producing.



LECTURE XXXIII.

ON STRUMOUS OPHTHALMIA.

Strumous, or scrofulous ophthalmia, is so called, because it is met
with in those persons who are of a scrofulous diathesis — it occurs in
children, and not unfrequently in adults. The inflammation is of the
atonic character, that is, if I may be allowed to use a solecism, it is
chronic from the commencement, it is one of atony from the beginning ;
and the reason why it is necessary to speak particularly of this com-
plaint is, because there is one symptom invariably present — intolerance
of light. The patient cannot bear the least access of light ; there is
great difficulty of opening the lids, the orbicularis palpebrarum appears
spasmodically contracted, and so difficult is it for a patient to open the
eyes, that he can seldom do it : an adult may have sufficient resolution,
but it is necessary that the eyes should be opened. The only way in
which this can be done, is by fixing the head of the patient,, when it is
a child, between your knees, with the fore-finger of the one hand to
raise the upper lid, and that of the other to depress the lower, which will
give you an opportunity of seeing the eye; but in doing this, great
caution will be required to prevent eversion of the under lid, or any
undue violence to the part. When you examine the conjunctiva, you
will be surprised to find how little it is inflamed, though the child does
not raise its head from the mother’s lap. I say that it will be neces-
sary to examine the eye frequently during this state. Disorganization
of the different parts of this organ often take place ; the cornea, or ra-
ther conjunctiva covering it, becomes covered with an opaque capsule,
with vessels shooting over the cornea, so as to give it an herpetic appear-
ance ; that is, there will be seen over the cornea yellow spots, which are
deposits of lymph. These open into small ulcers, which are streaked
with vessels carrying red blood. The eye becomes very painful, and
extremely irritable, and there is often, in this state, intense redness of
the conjunctiva. Under these circumstances, similar ulcers form in dif-
ferent parts of the cornea. The formation of these ulcers produces all



ON STRUMOUS OPHTHALMIA.



255



the symptoms of acute inflammation of the eye, and the organ not un-
frequently becomes slowly and gradually disorganized. So long, how-
ever, as the cornea continues bright, and of its natural colour, there will
be no danger to be apprehended from the formation of ulcers. But it is
of the greatest importance that the cornea should be narrowly watched,
as, if the inflammation continues for a long time, ulcers are very apt to
form on it. But the most distressing symptom, and the one about
which the patient expresses the greatest uneasiness, is the intolerance of
light.



TREATMENT OF STRUMOUS OPHTHALMIA.

I have said that the inflammation is one of the atonic kind, yet there
exists considerable irritation. Depletion must he had recourse to, but
not to any considerable extent : it will be right to apply leeches, but
certainly blood-letting should not be pushed too far, and throughout
the whole treatment it will be necessary to keep in view the nature of
the constitution which is generally met with in scrofulous subjects ; it
is languid and debilitated ; the digestive organs are deranged ; there is
loss of appetite — tongue white and furred ; bowels torpid ; secretions
defective in quantity and in quality — skin dry and hot ; in fact there is
a good deal of fever present. The mild depleting plan must be first
adopted, regulated as far as the constitution will bear it : you must re-
move the symptoms of irritation ; open the bowels freely by calomel
purges, repeated more or less frequently as they improve the secretions.
Alterative mercurial medicines should then be given, and if necessary
they should be combined with rhubarb and magnesia, but not so as to
produce watery stools.

When the fever becomes diminished, the bowels perform their natu-
ral functions, the tongue looks clean, and the skin assumes its healthy
leel, you may begin with tonic remedies. Aromatic bitters, combined
with alkalies, will be found useful remedies. But at the same time you
must amend the state of the constitution by attention to regimen and
diet- The food should be light and nutritious, clothing warm. Exer-
cise should likewise be taken ; not to such an extent as to produce fe-
brile excitements, but to invigorate the health. Sea-bathing will be of
advantage ; and when the constitution is not in that state to bear the
cold-bath, the warm should be used ; and if the patient is in a situation
where sea-bathing cannot be resorted to, he should sponge himself with
tepid water, gradually accustoming himself to the use of cold ; by this
means the general health will be much improved. As for the treatment
of the part affected, it will be right to employ depletion at the onset, as
far as the application of leeches. It will be proper also to apply blisters



256



ON PSOROPHTHALMY.



behind the ears, or to the nape of the neck ; and blisters in this com-
plaint are no ordinary remedy. You will be surprised to find, after the
application of a blister, how soon the intolerance of light will vanish,
even in children ; their disposition will rapidly alter, and the inflam-
mation be so slight, that you can actually open their eyes without any
trouble. Warm and moist applications are beneficial ; the steam of
water containing opium allowed to go on the eyes will be good. About
a drachm of opium dissolved in a pint of hot water, and the steam of it
directed over the eye, will relieve, to a considerable degree, the irrita-
tion. But if any of these applications be used at the onset, they must
not be long continued before recourse is had to mild astringent collyria.
Their strength must be regulated by the feelings of the patient; not so
strong as to irritate, but to be followed by relief to the part affected.
The vinuvn opii is a remedy particularly adapted to this complaint at
an advanced stage : it tends considerably to lessen the irritability of the
part, and to increase the strength of the relaxed vessels. At the onset,
however, a more active plan of treatment must be adopted : relief must
be sought by the application of leeches and blisters, more especially by
the last. It will be necessary sometimes to give mercury so as slightly
to affect the mouth, remembering the state of the constitution in scro-
fulous persons, and taking great care that it is not pushed so far as to
affect the general health.

Another form of inflammation of the eyes, nearly allied to the one I
have just been describing, because it is in general a consequence of it, is

PSOROPHTHALMY.

Psorophthalmy is an inflammation particularly of that part of the
conjunctiva which lines the lids, but it extends sometimes over the
whole of the conjunctiva covering the globe. This complaint is often
obstinate, and extremely difficult of cure : it extends over the cornea,
conjunctival lining of the palpebrse, the cheek and nose; and, lastly,
the globe of the eye becomes affected, if this complaint be not checked.
At the origin of this disease, there is a glutinous matter secreted on tire
edge of the lids; ulcers form ; and there is often great difficulty in se-
parating the lids from one another. By this means matter lodges on
the lids, and tends to keep up the irritation of the -whole of the part.
You not unfrequently see the redness extending down the whole of the
cheek, and excoriation taking place on the cuticle. If the inflammation
spreads over the whole of the conjunctiva, the lachrymal sac becomes
irritated, and effusion of tears over the cheek takes place on the surface
of the cheek. The inflammation is of the atonic kind, accompanied
with that symptom distinguishing strumous ophthalmia, intolerance of



ON PSOROPHTHALMY.



25 1



light, and a feel as if there were some extraneous body in the eye, grit
or sand, which gives rise to an effusion of the tears. The lids are very
red on the edges, and there is an incrustation of matter on them. There
is occasionally a contraction of the integument of the lower lid, by
which it becomes depressed and everted. In this inflammation the
secretion deposited from the lids dries up, ulcers form, small briny in-
crustations are formed, and there is an appearance of tinea on the lids.
The watery part of the secretion from the lids is evaporated, which
leaves the incrustations that keep up the irritation and form small
ulcers. In consequence, an alteration in the figure of the tarsi occurs;
there is a contraction of the cellular membrane just beneath the lower
palpebra, and eversion of that lid. This affection of the eye is of diffi-
cult management, and is frequently found in persons of a scrofulous
diathesis, in children of large towns who are ill fed and worse clothed,
with little attention paid to cleanliness. The complaint is very obstinate
in its cure ; and if relieved, it generally returns, and becomes as bad as
ever. It is not, however, confined to the lower classes, but the higher
and middling ranks of society are sometimes attacked with it — those
who are of a scrofulous diathesis. In schools also it will be found ; it
frequently arises from the irritating matter being applied to the lid,
which may be conveyed from one to another by using the same towel,
or in some such way. The treatment of this complaint does not essen-
tially differ from that of the strumous; it is an inflammation without
power, one of the atonic kind. Depletion must not be pursued to any
extent. It will be right when any symptoms of irritation are present
to remove them by the application of leeches, and opening the bowels.
Drastic purgatives must not be exhibited, as they do not answer the
object which it is intended to effect; mild aperients, combined with
mercurial medicines, such as calomel, the hydrargyrus cum creta, or
the blue pill, and in quantities so as t d give tone to the system. When
any febrile excitement that may have existed is removed, begin with
tonic remedies ; that is, when the skin has its natural feel, and the
tongue is clean, and the secretions from the bowels are regular in their
quantity and quality. The applications to the part should consist of
mild stimulants, and the best form in which they can be exhibited is
that of ointment. The briny incrustations on the edges of the lid, and
which are secreted from the meibomian follicles, confine the lids so
closely together, that in the morning when the patient awakes they
have the appearance of being glued together. This leads to produce
increased irritation on the edges of the palpebrce. To prevent this the
lids are to be besmeared with some ointment. The one commonly used
is that called the citrine ointment, the unguentum hydrargyri nitratis :

z 2



258



ON NEBULA.



but it cannot be well borne of the usual strength, and therefore is diluted
with one-third, or one-half, or perhaps more than this, of unguentum
cetacei, and this is applied with a camel-hair brush twice a day, the
incrustations of matter being carefully washed off before its application,
and then some of the ointment is to be besmeared along the edges. The
unguentum hydrargyri nitrico-oxydi is used for the same purpose. In
fact, any of the milder stimulating mercurial ointments will do. The
application will be required to be varied, and the degree of strength
must be regulated by the effect on the eye. The use of the vinum opii
will be attended with beneficial results, and the application of blisters
will have an universally good effect. In the use of blisters, however,
in this complaint, as well as in strumous ophthalmia, r.o advantages
will be derived from keeping them open ; for when this is done, they
are apt to give rise to fresh irritation. Therefore, after the application
of a blister, you should desire it to be healed ; and, if necessary, direct
a fresh one to be applied. By this means the irritation in the eyes will
be relieved, and their employment be attended with advantage.

The consequences of inflammation of the eye requiring distinct notice,
and which are accompanied with equal or less inflammation of the con-
junctiva, and kept up or excited by attendant circumstances, are now to
be spoken of. In the first place, we shall treat of

NEBULA.

This complaint is so called from the nebulous or cloudy appearance
of the transparent part of the eye, which is produced by deposits of
lymph into the conjunctiva covering the cornea. The membrane or
layer stretched over the cornea will vary according to the more or less
relaxed state of the vessels of the conjunctiva, which will be seen car-
rying red blood to the part. The veins corresponding to the nebulous
parts will become turgid and prominent. If there be considerable in-
flammation, it must be removed by active means ; and in these cases
it will be proper to deplete. The inflammation, however, is generally
of the chronic kind, and arises from a relaxed state of the vessels, which
require stimulating applications, in order that they may recover their
tone, and convey the blood uninterruptedly. If the vessels be stimu-
lated, the blood will be likely to flow through the veins ; the absorbents
will be excited, and remove the effused lymph. By stimulating appli-
cations, the cornea will frequently be restored to the same state of
transparency as before the attack. Care must be taken that in the
treatment no undue degree of stimulus be employed ; if there should be
inflammation it will be increased, and the complaint be as bad or worse
than ever. A collyrium that may be used, is one with the sulphate of



ON PUSTULES.



259



zinc, containing about a grain to an ounce of water, gradually increasing
it in strength. One which has been recommended, is that with the
corrosive sublimate, with a grain to an ounce of water. Calomel or
levigated sugar has been used in many cases with good effects. This
is quite an old woman’s remedy, and has been recommended very in-
discriminately. Unscientific persons — those who are not acquainted
with the nature of the disease in which it is useful — seeing it do good
in one complaint, think it will in all others of a similar appearance,
though essentially different in their character, and therefore employ it
in cases where it does harm, using it alike in a cicatrix from ulceration
as in nebula arising from a deposit of lymph. In the one, if it be em-
ployed, loss of substance will be the result — inflammation will be ex-
cited, and fresh ulcers will form. In the other, that is, in nebula, it
will often be of service, care being taken not to produce an over degree
of stimulus in the part.



pustui.es.

Pustules are generally seated at the junction of the transparent with
the opaque cornea ; but they may sometimes occur in the cornea itself,
or the conjunctiva covering it or the ball. They are seated in different
parts. The appearances that they present at first are red or yellowish
spots arising from a deposit of lymph in those parts, and are slightly
elevated. There is considerable turgescence of the vessels around them.
If they occur on the cornea, it will be nubelous and opaque ; the vessels
round the cornea will be seen distended, carrying red blood, and having
a radiated disposition. If the lymph be not removed by absorption,
the pustules break, matter escapes, and ulcers form in their place.
Sometimes there is only one of these ulcers, frequently two, one at each
side of the cornea, just at the junction of the transparent with the
opaque cornea, and occasionally the cornea is even encircled by them.
Although the inflammation accompanying the formation of pustules is
not acute, yet it frequently happens that there will be more or less pain
on moving the eye, intolerance of light, and effusion of tears. These
ulcers are difficult to manage, as they often occur in the scrofulous
habits of body and broken-up constitutions, and are apt to become
chronic, and consequently difficult of cure. When the healing of the
ulcers takes place, and the same state of body continues, they are soon
reproduced, and the disease is greatly aggravated. As for the treatment
this affection requires, it will be hardly necessary to say, that if con-
siderable inflammation exists, depletion must be employed. The in-
flammation, however, is of the atonic kind. First apply leeches, but
not in large numbers, so as not to carry depletion to too great an extent:



260



ON FUNGUS OF THE CONJUNCTIVA.



it will be proper to evacuate the bowels, not by drastic purges, but mild
aperients, and to attend to the secretions. Blisters will be useful, if the
sight be affected. When the state of the bowels has been regulated, you
must begin with tonic remedies, and as early as possible with mild as-
tringent collyria, and the best is the vinum opii. The only point to
guard against is, that depletion be not pursued to too great an extent at
the outset. The system must be invigorated by tonic remedies, and
tone given to the vessels of the part.

The next affection to which I shall direct your attention, is the result
of purulent ophthalmia, which is that called

FUNGUS OF THE CONJUNCTIVA.

This appearance of the conjunctiva occurs in diseased subjects. The
conjunctiva becomes loose and red, the vessels turgid with blood, and
there is a fold of this membrane on the inside of the lids, which produces
considerable irregularity on its surface — a morbid secretion is kept up
on the part — and not unfrequently eversion of the lids is the result.
Extraneous bodies often enter the eye, and disturb it considerably. To
prevent this, and remedy the complaint, the loose portion of the con-
junctiva should be removed, which is a very easy operation. An as-
sistant holding the lid, you, by the means of a pair of forceps, raise the
fold of the conjunctiva, and with a pair of curved scissors remove it. As
to the after treatment, you must keep down inflammation, should it
appear, by the means already recommended.

There is another affection more frequently met with than this, viz.

GRANULATIONS OF THE CONJUNCTIVA.

These are nothing more than loose irregularities of this membrane
where it lines the lids. These projections continue to pour out a por-
tion of morbid secretion, which stimulates and irritates the whole eye ;
the palpebral conjunctiva becomes altered in its texture, and its surface
is covered with fleshy elevation, having the exact appearance of granu-
lations. These granulations covering the surface of the conjunctiva
lining the lids are constantly rubbed over the globe of the eye whenever
it moves, producing pain and irritation, and keeping up morbid secre-
tion, and, in fact, giving rise to chronic ophthalmia. Thus easy access
is afforded to extraneous bodies, nebulous opacities form on the cornea,
vessels will be seen shooting over it, and these will be quite in a varicose
state, enlarged, and having a knotty appearance. The granulations, if
not removed or remedied, produce ultimate blindness. Considerable
advantage is said to be derived from the following plan of treatment: —
Remove the granulating surface of the conjunctiva by the lancet, or by a



ON ENCANTHIS.



261



pair of curved scissors. I am not able myself to say that I have seen
any great good result from this mode of treatment. Touching the gra-
nulations with nitrate of silver or sulphate of copper will tend ma-
terially to keep them down. One remedy in this complaint was first
mentioned to me by my friend, Mr. Tyrrell, who stated that he had
tried it with advantage : the liquor plumbi sabacetatis applied to the sur-
face of the granulations. The result of my experience has been to con-
firm this statement. If the vessels on the cornea be numerous, it will be
proper to divide the trunks which supply them. This is a very simple
operation. You must raise the lid and press on the globe, by which
means you distend it and project it forwards ; you then carry a sharp
curved instrument round the outside of the cornea, and divide the ves-
sels, so that they shall not reunite. A bar of lymph is thrown out,
which turns the vessels from off their course, excepting perhaps, the
small ones, which often reunite. It will be necessary, perhaps, to
repeat it. Cases of this complaint are difficult to cure. These are re-
medies then to be used : removing the granulations, applying caustic
applications, and the division of the varicose and enlarged vessels.
These may be aided by setons, issues, and blisters, and attention
to the general health.

ENCANTHIS.

This consists in an alteration of the structure of the caruncula lachry-
malis, and neighbouring semilunar fold of the conjunctiva. The ca-
runcula is enlarged ; at the commencement it has a granulated appear-
ance, which it loses as it increases, and then becomes similar to a hazel
nut, being ash -coloured, and streaked with varicose vessels. This en-
largement or excrescence prevents the lids from closing, and allows
extraneous matter to enter, which keeps up inflammation of the eye,
and it also presses on the puncta-lachrymalia, and turns them out of
their place ; the tears, thus prevented from getting into the lachrymal
sac, are effused on the cheek. The best treatment is to remove it alto-
gether. It is a simple operation, and is thus performed : an assistant
raising the lid, by taking up the tumour with a pair of forceps, removes
it with a pair of curved scissors with convex edges. When this com-
plaint has not assumed the malignant form, it is always remediable by
excision. Never operate, however, when the encanthis has become of
the malignant kind, and put on the cancerous appearance. This will
be known by the dull red colour'of the excrescence, its excessive hard-
ness, lancinating pains extending to the eye-ball and forehead, particu-
larly when touched, foul ulcers, with irregular edges, having all the ap-
pearance of cancer in any other part of the body.

-The last affection of which I shall speak is



262



ON INFLAMMATION OF THE CORNEA.



I’TEEyGIUM.

This is all of the triangular shape, and may be divided into the mem-
branous and fleshy. The first has the appearance of a thin film of mi-
nute vessels converging towards the cornea. The usual seat of this
affection is towards the inner canthus, that is, with the base at the can-
thus and the apex against the cornea. It is always of a triangular
shape, and the vessels proceed from the base to the apex. The fact is,
that pterygia do not long exist before they produce a nebulous state of
the transparent part of the eye by deposits of lymph, and then of fluid.
The conjunctiva and sclerotic coat becomes loaded with vessels, and if
this affection is not remedied, vision becomes impaired, and is ulti-
mately lost. The fleshy pterygia differ from the membranous, and are
more vascular. They first appear of a yellowish colour. Then the
vessels running through them become large, and they have a red appear-
ance ; but always retain their triangular shape. When the disease has
proceeded far on the transparent part of the eye, the only plan to adopt
will be the removal of a part of the pterygium. This consists simply
in raising the membrane as near as you can to the cornea, and cutting
it through while suspended. When the pterygia are fleshy, more care
must be taken in dividing them ; they must be divided near to the mar-
gin of the cornea, and turned back from the apex towards the base.

There are a few other affections of the conjunctiva, but not of suffi-
cient importance for me to detain you any longer this evening.

LECTURE XXXIV.

OK INFLAMMATION OF THE CORKEA.

At the outset, in inflammation attacking the transparent cornea, there
is a hazy appearance, the cornea loses its natural lustre, and in a short
time there may be discovered on its surface, vessels carrying red blood,
and then the symptoms will be the same as those of inflammation in
general ; the patient will complain of intolerance of light, and also have
effusion of tears. When the inflammation of the cornea continues,
matter very frequently forms between its lamella;, and the appearance
which it then assumes is called onyx or unguis, from its resemblance to
a nail ; the matter is to be very distinctly seen in the transparent part of
the eye, and gradually extends till it occupies one-third or fourth of the
cornea. If you place the eye in profile, you can generally observe yel-
lowish spots, which are usually seated at the anterior part of the cornea,
and if you employ gentle pressure with a probe, the fluid may be felt

»l




ULCERATION OF THE CORNEA.



263



fluctuating within. In the various positions of the head, the matter
does not shift its situation, but remains in the same spot. By proper
treatment the matter often becomes absorbed, but it not unfrequently
makes its way externally, or an opening is formed internally, and the
matter then is effused into the anterior chamber of the eye. I shall defer
speaking of the treatment of this inflammation till I have considered the
next subject.



ULCERATION OF THE CORNEA.

This disease is the common consequence of inflammation of the
cornea ; but it is very frequently produced by the contact of matter in
purulent ophthalmia, and the irritation of lime, or by any sharp-pointed
bodies which may be insinuated into the cornea ; or, in fact, any irri-
tating substance, mechanical or chemical, that may be introduced into
the eye. The inflammation produces the formation of pus — this breaks,
and an ulcer is formed. In ulcers of the cornea you will find the edges
rugged, uneven, and elevated, the ulcer itself having an ash-coloured
appearance, and the patient complaining of great pain ; there will also
be a discharge of a good deal of acrid and irritating matter. In general
there will be no difficulty in distinguishing ulcers of the cornea ; all you
have to do is to put the eye in profile, and take a side view of this organ,
and you will see the ulcer with the appearances 1 have described. The
situation of the ulcers of the cornea varies ; very frequently they are
at the superior portion, and affecting only the external lamellae, in other
cases spreading over the whole cornea, and penetrating into the anterior
chamber, by which means the aqueous humour escapes, and the iris is
often protruded ; sometimes even the opening becomes enlarged, and the
crystalline lens and vitreous humour escape. The ulcers vary in their
appearance, some being large and others small, and those which are of
small size, on cicatrization, do not materially obstruct vision, whilst
those that are large, when healed, produce a nebulous appearance which
destroys the power of sight.

Treatment of Inflammation and Ulceration of the Cornea. The

treatment required in inflammation of the cornea does not differ materially
from that of inflammation of the conjunctiva, or any other part of the
eye, and therefore it will not be necessary to recapitulate the means ne-
cessary to be adopted ; you must rely on the efficacy of a strict anti-
phlogistic plan, and when the acute inflammation has been subdued, on
the use of mild astringent collyria. When ulcers, however, form in any
part of the cornea, it will be proper to use active means, if they be ac-
companied by acute inflammation ; but most frequently they are accom-
panied by chronic ophthalmia, and have a disposition to spread rather



264



ON STAPHYLOMA.



than heal. In these cases astringent lotions will be of great service ;
but of all remedies in ulcers of the cornea, the nitrate of silver is the one
on which you are to depend ; it is generally used in a state of solution,
about two grains to an ounce of water, or it will be better to begin with
a grain to an ounce, regulating the strength in proportion to the degree
of irritation it may produce. Scarpa gives the preference to the caustic
itself in the treatment of the ulcers of the cornea ; the caustic is to be cut
to a sharp point, and the ulcer to be touched with it. An eschar forms,
which, in the course of two or three days, falls off, and the symptoms of
the disease returns as before ; the caustic is again to be applied, and to
be repeated a third time, if necessary. The ulcer, by this means, loses
its ash-coloured appearance, the edges become regular and even, and
it rapidly heals. When ulcers of the cornea are attended by acute in-
flammation, it will be necessary to employ bleeding, by leeches, before
the use of astringents, and at the same time to keep the bowels regular
by mild aperients. Luring the progress of the ulcers, it will be neces-
sary to watch them very closely, and examine them frequently, but in
doing it great caution must be used lest the eye- lids become everted.
When the ulcers heal, it is by cicatrization, as in any other part of the
body, and afterwards specks are left which are nothing more than
rounded spots of coagulable lymph, and are denominated leucoma or
albugo ; and in these cases the rays of light are not prevented entering
the eye, except when the spots are on the axis of vision, and then they
are interrupted.

The next disease to which the cornea is subject is
STAPHYLOMA.

In this disease the cornea becomes opaque, considerably elevated, and
altered in texture. The eye-lids are prevented from being closed ; there
is perpetual irritation kept up by the friction of the palpebr* on the ball.
This disease frequently comes on after small-pox, and is one of the
sequel* belonging to that formidable complaint. By the separation of
the lids extraneous bodies often enter the eye ; irritation is produced by
the friction of the lids and eye-lashes — and thus a considerable degree
of inconvenience is produced to the patient, and the eye kept in a state
of chronic ophthalmy ; and the sound eye becomes sympathetically
affected.

In this disease the iris often protrudes ; the vitreous humour is altered
in texture ; and the crystalline lens is projected forwards. In this com-
plaint nothing can be done for the restoration of sight ; and the only
plan of treatment will be to remove the staphylomatous part, so as to
return the eye within the orbit, and permit the use of an artificial eye.



ON INFLAMMATION OF THE IRIS.



265



The operation is exceedingly simple; the surgeon first passes a needle
with a ligature through the staphylomatous part, in order to steady the
eye, and then with the other hand takes the cornea knife, and removes
as much of the projecting part as may be necessary. The operation
gives little pain : it generally happens that the iris adheres to the cor-
nea, and that portion of it is removed. The crystalline lens escapes,
together with a portion of vitreous humour, and the eye collapses, so
that, when the part is healed, an artificial eye may be worn. These
are now made so much to resemble the natural eye, that they may be
worn without the deception being detected. This is the only treatment
that can be adopted with any relief to the patient. The cornea some-
times becomes conical, or of a conoid shape ; in these cases the cornea
loses its natural lustre — the sight becomes impaired. Glasses afford no
relief to the sight in this altered shape of the cornea ; nor is there any
remedy with which I am acquainted that does. I have seen several
cases of this kind, and have not known any good result from the treat-
ment that has been adopted. Having considered all the affections of
the cornea, I shall proceed to those of the other parts of the eye.

INFLAMMATION OF THE IKIS.

Inflammation of the iris, or, as it has been latterly called, iritis, is a
peculiar and specific inflammation of the eye. The symptoms attending
this complaint are in some cases with great difficulty recognized. In
looking into the eye, you see the iris changed in colour, or having a
brownish hue ; or rather a reddish brown colour (this, however, varies
according to the natural colour of the iris), from the increased number
of vessels on its surface carrying red blood. The iris itself is altered
in texture, being puckered and thickened. These appearances are soon
removed, and deposits of yellow lymph, resembling yellow tubercles,
will be seen on the iris ; the pupil becomes irregular, and altered in
shape, and the pupillary margin of the iris thickened, and turned back
towards the posterior chamber. These then are the principal symptoms
by which you recognize iritis ; but, besides these, the aqueous humour
becomes turbid, and the ciliary vessels on the surface of the sclerotic
form a zone of vessels immediately surrounding the upper part of the
cornea, which have a different appearance from those in inflammation
of the conjunctiva, the latter having a tortuous course, whilst the others
go in a straight direction. The conjunctiva partakes of the inflamma-
tion, and assumes a red appearance. The pain in the eye is not acute,
but the patient cannot bear the light. There is also considerable con-
stitutional irritation or fever, which may be known by the state of the
pulse, and other symptoms. Inflammation of the iris often comes on



A A



266



ON INFLAMMATION OF THE IRIS.



from very slight causes ; it occasionally happens to those who have been
under the influence of mercury, and in persons of a scrofulous diathesis,
or when mercury has been pushed to an undue extent.

Iritis has, in consequence of its occurring so frequently after syphilis,
been classed as a secondary symptom of that complaint : I have, I must
say, considerable doubt bn the subject, for I have never met with it in
a person labouring at the same time under any other secondary symp-
toms of syphilis, with eruptions or nodes on the bones : and also I have
never met with a case of iritis after syphilis, but when mercury had been
previously given, and therefore I cannot say whether the inflammation
of the iris was the effect of the mercury, or of the original disease for
which it was given. Iritis is not unffequently accompanied by inflam-
mation of the tunics of the eye — what may be called ophthalmitis , or
deep-seated inflammation of the globe of the eye. In this complaint
the sclerotic appears reddened — the cornea is dull, and the capsule of
the lens itself becomes opaque ; all these participate in the inflammation.
There is deposition of lymph on the edges of the iris, and there are also
adhesions of it in some places to the crystalline lens. The sclerotic
coat, however, is particularly inflamed ; the vessels may be seen carry-
ing the blood in a straight course, while those of the conjunctiva are
tortuous. There is pain in the eye, intolerance of light ; also these
symptoms, together with a turbid state of the humours, are sufficient
to inform one of the presence of inflammation of the sclerotic coat : the
patient also labours, at the same time, under great febrile excitement.
This inflammation is often attended by a disorganization of the organ.
The result of this severe form of inflammation, if it be not checked,
is effusion' of lymph or matter into the anterior chamber of the eye,
producing what is technically called hypopivm. In, these cases the
matter may be easily observed, and sometimes there is so much as to
conceal the edges of the pupil and the iris.

Treatment . — Of course the first part of the treatment will be, to re-
lieve the irritation of the part by blood-letting, both general and local ;
and, in fact, all the steps of depletion must be adopted, as in other in-
flammations of the eye. But there is one remedy above all others in
this complaint on which you are to rely, and that is mercury : it must
be given so as to affect the Constitution, till the gums and mouth are
sore, or the saliva begins to flow, which will be the signs of it. In iritis,
this medicine must be given, let whatever quantities may have been
taken before. The best form in which it can be exhibited is that of
calomel ; let it be given internally after the bleeding, in the dose of two
or three grains, combined with about a third or a quarter of a grain of
opium, so as to prevent its acting on the bowels. In order that the



ON HUMOURS OF THE EYE.



267



calomel may affect the system, it must be given every fourth or sixth
hour, till the mouth is sore ; in more chronic forms of this complaint it
may be given less frequently. As soon as the system has become
affected, you will see the zone of vessels disappearing, the lymph ab-
sorbed, the aqueous humour becoming clear, and the cornea losing its
hazy appearance. Othet remedies have been recommended, but there
is not one on which you can rely but the exhibition of mercury. The
belladonna will be found a very useful adjunct in this complaint ; by
dilating the pupils, the adhesions are often prevented from forming
between the iris and capsule of the crystalline lens, and when they are
formed it tends to elongate the adhesions. The belladonna should be
applied, in the form of extract, around the eye, morning and evening.

AMAUROSIS.

By amaurosis, I mean partial or total loss of vision, arising from
paralysis of the optic nerve or retina ; and this is produced by a con-
gestion of the vessels of the part, or minute alteration of its structure.
1 he symptoms distinguishing this complaint are few, and therefore
require to be well known. The pupil is generally dilated and motion-
less ; the iris is nearly immoveable, acts very little, and vision is
completely destroyed. There is also slight strabismus. In amaurosis,
there is frequently the sensation as if a cloud were before the eye, which
is termed caligo , and there is often a greenish appearance of the hu-
mours, which is named glaucoma. This depends on an alteration of
the lens, or an alteration in the structure of the vitreous humour. The
persons subjected to this complaint are those who have been in the
habit of viewing minute objects, or exposing the eyes to strong light.
Persons affected with amaurosis are frequently troubled with false ap-
pearances — -as flashes of light, or balls of fire before their eyes. I shall
divide the causes of amaurosis into three parts : — 1st, Those which affect
the retina or optic nerve. 2d, Those affecting the brain, or that part
of it from which the optic nerves arise, the thalamia nervorum opticorum.
And, .idly, Those affecting the body at large, or some particular organ,
and thus sympathetically affecting the eye.



LECTURE XXXV.

ON HUMOURS OF THE EYE.

In the preceding lectures, gentlemen, I have described the affections
of the coats of the eye ; this evening I shall proceed to treat of those
of the humours of the eye. Very little, however, can be said of the



268



ON HYDROPHTHALMIA.



aqueous and vitreous humours, as most of the diseases to which the
humours are subject, attack the crystalline lens, or its capsule ; there-
fore, 1 shall chiefly direct your attention to them.

HYDROPHTHALMIA.

The aqueous humour is sometimes the subject of an accumulation
which is known by the name of hydrophthalmia, or dropsy of the eye ;
and consists of an increased secretion of this humour. The symptoms
of this complaint are — that the eye becomes more distended than na-
tural ; the cornea widened ; the sclerotic coat attached to the cornea has
a blue tint or cast ; the sight is affected ; the motions of the iris im-
paired ; and the disease at last terminates in amaurosis. On what this
complaint depends, it would be difficult to say ; it is generally preceded
by chronic ophthalmia.

Treatment . — The remedies recommended for this complaint are va-
rious, of the most opposite kind, and have been tried generally without
any good effect. Puncturing the cornea, at a short distance from the
sclerotic, has been tried, and it is said with success. I have, however,
seen several cases of this affection, and no benefit whatever was derived
fijom any means that were employed.

The vitreous humour is occasionally affected. There is sometimes a
deficiency of this humour, arising from part of it being lost in the course
of an operation ; and the quantity lost is often so considerable, that the
part supported by the aqueous humour is not sufficiently firm to keep
up the natural roundness and plumpness of the eye. The medium of
refracting the rays of light is destroyed, the sight becomes impaired,
and glasses afford no relief.

There is the tremulous iris after couching, arising from the same
cause as the preceding affection. Another change which takes place in
the vitreous humour is that known by the name of

GLAUCOMA.

In this complaint the vitreous humour becomes altered in texture,
more dense, and presents a sea-green hue, and the pupil is dilated.
This disease has often been mistaken for cataract, and a person affected
with it is frequently supposed to have a cataract in its incipient stage.
On examining the eye minutely, this greenish appearance may be ob-
served to be behind the crystalline lens, and posterior to the seat of the
cataract ; it may be, however, mistaken for many diseases, and has a
greater resemblance to cataract than any other. Glaucoma remains
without any change by whicli it may be distinguished from fungus of
the eye, of which I shall speak to you in another lecture. The diag-



ON DIFFERENT KINDS OF CATARACT. 269

nosis is not difficult. Having mentioned the affections of the aqueous
and vitreous humours, I come next to consider the different species of
cataract.

CATARACT.

By cataract, is meant an opacity of the crystalline lens, or its capsule,
the cataract depending on a morbid secretion of the liquor morgagni
being very rare : thjs is an exception, but the ordinary definition is the
one I have just given. This complaint seems to have been understood
by Hippocrates ; but the notions of Galen and those who followed him,
respecting cataract, were very confused; and it was not till the end of
the 17 th, or beginning of the 18th century, that the nature of this dis-
ease began to be understood, when Mery and Maitre-Jean, and others,
gave fair accounts of this complaint. The symptoms of cataract are
unequivocal, and may be easily recognised. At first there is always
defect of vision, and the patient sees things as through a mist, and re-
quires a strong light to see them plainly ; this symptom changes during
the progress of the complaint, the patient being able to see better in a
moderate than a strong light ; and then a speck, or opacity in the lens
or capsule may be distinctly observed ; it is generally in the centre of
the pupil, and at the situation of the lens ; this gradually enlarges, and,
in proportion as the opacity increases, the sight becomes more dim, and
the capability of discerning objects diminishes. In the progress of the
cataract, the patient can see better in a faint than in a strong light ; and
this is easily explained, because in the faint light the iris dilates, and
the rays of light are transmitted through the circumference of the crys-
talline lens, which is not yet obscured. But you see these symptoms
differ in the different kinds of this disease, and this leads me to consider
the different species of cataract : it is extremely important that they
should be known, as the operation that it will be necessary to perform
depends on the kind of cataract which exists ; but it is to be observed
that the criteria are, to say the best of them, very fallible. On looking
at a cataract, you cannot always be certain that it is of this or that kind,
hut on the whole you are enabled to give a pretty good guess. The
symptoms characterizing each kind will be spoken of under the different
heads.

DIFFERENT KINDS OF CATARACT.

There are four kinds of cataract : 1st, The hard or firm cataract ;
2d, The fluid or milky cataract ; 3d, The soft or caseous cataract ; and,
besides these, ithere is a fourth kind, the capsular cataract ; the three
first forming in the lens itself, and the last in the capsule. The last
kind of cataract comes on after an operation, or in consequence of it,
and is also found in children, when it is called congenital cataract. This

A a 2



270



ON FIRM OR HARD CATARACT.



kind of cataract does not differ essentially from the other forms of cap-
sular cataract, but is called congenital, on account of its occurring at a
particular period of life, or children being born with it. This form of
cataract also requires a particular kind of operation, and will be parti-
cularly spoken of. Of the lenticular cataract there are three kinds, the
soft, fluid, and hard. These different kinds of cataract occur at different
periods of life. It is stated that the firm or hard cataract is found in
advanced age, whilst the soft occurs at an earlier period. There is one
circumstance respecting these different kinds of cataracts it will be
proper to mention : that is, it is not at all common for one form to go
into another — for the soft to go into the hard, for instance, is exceed-
ingly rare. I allude to an opinion which used to prevail, that a soft
cataract became hard, and then it was said to be ripe. This idea is now
given up, and experience proves it to be incorrect.

Let us now consider the different symptoms attending the different
kinds of cataract.

FIRM OR HARD CATARACT.

In this kind of cataract the lens acquires a greater degree of density
or firmness than natural; and in undergoing this change, it becomes
smaller and thinner, and more concentrated. If you look at the cata-
ract, you will see that it has not the natural whiteness of that complaint ;
it has a yellow or brownish appearance, the colour of amber. The next
particular you observe is the interspace between the iris and front part
of the lens, on account of the lens becoming thinner. The motions of
the iris are free, there being no adhesions. There is generally some de-
gree of vision, and the patient can often discern large and bright objects,
and even differences of colour, and sometimes the shadow of minute
objects. When the light is faint, the patient can see more distinctly
than when it is strong. This kind of cataract generally occurs at an
advanced period of life. By these symptoms, then, you will distin-
guish this kind of cataract : — by its colour and size the interspace be-
tween the front part of the lens and the iris : the vision being more or
less distinct; and, lastly, by its occurring at an advanced period of life.

FLUID CATARACT.

This kind of cataract is always more or less fluid, and is called
milky, from its white colour. The fluid cataract is not of equal density
throughout. If you examine the eye of a patient with attention, you
will see that it has a flocculent appearance, from specks or streaks con-
sisting of solid particles of the lens, and these will move up and down in
the various positions and motions of the head, and be removed out of






ON SOFT OR CASEOUS CATARACT.



271



sight; but on the head becoming steady, they again appear. This
arises from their gravity ; on motion, they sink to the bottom, and of
course disappear. There will not be any difficulty in recognising this
form of cataract. Besides these symptoms, the lens becomes enlarged
and globular ; and the increase of size is such, that the lens reaches to
the iris, so that there is no posterior chamber at all. If you look at the
eye in profile, you will see that the iris is protruded forwards ; from this
pressure the motions of the iris are sluggish, and in some cases pre-
vented altogether. The size and shape of the pupil is altered. The
rays of light do not pass into the eye, and the patient can scarcely tell
the difference between light and darkness.

SOFT OR CASEOUS CATARACT.

This kind of cataract is of the consistence of firm jelly or cheese, it
is uniformly opaque, and there is a milky whiteness, as in the fluid ca-
taract ; but the spots and streaks sometimes observable in this form
never shift their position, as in the other ; the lens also becomes in-
creased in size. The posterior chamber is obliterated. There is no
interspace between the fore part of the lens and iris. The motions of
the iris are performed with difficulty, from the size of the lens, and the
rays of light are prevented from entering. The patients sometimes
cannot distinguish between light and darkness ; although they are sel-
dom so blind as this.



MEMBRANOUS CATARACT.

This form of cataract is not connected with the lens, but the capsule
itself. This opacity may exist either in the posterior or anterior layer
of the capsule, or combined with that of the lens, and thus produce ca-
taract. In this last case there is no distinct mark of diagnosis ; but
when the capsule only is affected, you may offer an opinion. If the
anterior layer of the capsule is opaque, it has the appearance of being
superficial and close to the pupil, and appears rather nebulous. It does
not quite lose its transparency, but becomes semi-transparent. When
the posterior layer is affected, this appearance is deeper ; being at a con-
siderable depth, and having more or less of a concave form. There are
also stria; passing in a radiated direction. If you observe, then, the
opacity deep-seated, and the lens appearing concave, you may know
that the posterior layer of the capsule is opaque ; but when this state is
combined with opacity of the lens, the diagnosis will be difficult.

Another species of membranous cataract is, when the capsule becomes
opaque, and the lens at the same time absorbed, and a tough, dense,
membranous substance is formed, as in congenital cataract. These are



272



ON CAUSES OF CATARACT.



the different marks that I have to offer to you for detecting the different
kinds of cataract ; but you see, from the nature of the observations,
how difficult it is to distinguish them. But it is necessary, as far as is
possible, to be acquainted with the appearances each form of cataract
presents, as the treatment or operation required must be adapted accord-
ing to the kind of cataract.

CAUSES OF CATARACT.

I have not much to offer you on this head, as the causes of cataract
are in general very obscure. Cataract, however, sometimes arises from
obvious causes — injury, violence, inflammation, or sharp-pointed bodies
wounding the capsule of the lens, or the lens itself, and consequently, pro-
ducing opacity of these parts. The opacity arising from this cause often
becomes absorbed, and the case undergoes the natural process of cure
without requiring an operation. It is produced too by inflammation of
the globe of the eye ; but then the cataract is capsular, and not lenti-
cular. Cataract, however, arising from these causes, is exceedingly
rare ; and by far the greater number of cases are produced, as it is
called, spontaneously, or under circumstances which are too subtle for
our cognizance. It has been said that where the eye has been tried a
good deal and subject to much exercise and strong light, as in black-
smiths, glass-blowers, &c., that cataract is produced : this is exceed-
ingly doubtful ; and if it is so, there are many cases in which no such
cause can be assigned. It is also not unfrequently congenital, and of
course produced from none of the causes mentioned. It also runs
through families, and appears to be hereditary. It has been shown
that it may be produced by external causes which are obvious, yet it
more frequently comes on without any assignable cause.

Prognosis — Of course, by this I mean a prognosis as to the issue of
the case by no other means than an operation ; that is, before perform-
ing the operation, ascertaining whether service can or cannot be afforded
by the operation : whether the changes which the eye may have undergone
from inflammation during the progress of the complaint, or the symp-
toms, are such as to preclude the chance of success if an operation were
performed, and destroy all hopes of vision ever being regained. Now
there are certain symptoms accompanying this affection, by which you
are enabled to form a pretty accurate opinion as to the issue. There
are some extremely valuable observations on this part of the subject
to be found in Scarpa's work on the diseases of the eye. The first cir-
cumstance which leads you to determine as to the success of the opera-
tion is, whether the loss of vision has been gradually supervening, and
has always been in proportion to the opacity of the lens ; second, whe-



ON CAUSES OF CATARACT.



273









ther the cataract has been accompanied by chronic ophthalmia, or any
changes have been produced in the eye by it : if the cataract has been
attended by a penetrating pain in any part of the eye, or orbit, or back
of the head, which it will be necessary to inquire about ; third, whether
the motions of the iris are duly performed, in the different variations of
the light ; if not, fear may be entertained of the eye being amaurotic ;
fourth, if there is the power of distinguishing between light and dark, or
the colour or forms of things, or the shade of passing objects. These
circumstances should be particularly inquired into ; and if you find the
patient has all, or the greater part of them — that is, if the defect of
sight has been increasing just in proportion to the increase of the opacity
of the lens, and the patient has had no pain in the head, and the motions
of the iris are free, and light can be distinguished; then you may
operate, and with the chance of success, as there are no evident reasons
against it.

For by the first circumstance you see that the vision has been impaired
in consequence of the opacity of the lens ; by the second, that there has
been no disorganizing inflammation in the eye, or that the brain and
origin of the optic nerves have been affected ; by the third, that the
retina is sound ; and by the fourth, if the opacity of the lens be re-
moved, that the retina will be in a state to receive the impression of ex-
ternal objects. But these signs are not so certain as they might appear,
for the iris might act, and yet amaurosis exist : and if one eye were not
closed, the motions of the iris of the other might be prevented, by sym-
pathy from the other. Thus it appears that the state of the iris does
not always determine the existence of amaurosis. When there is cata-
ract, the operation must be regulated by taking all the circumstances
into consideration ; by the figure of the cataract : whether there are any
adhesions of the iris to the capsule of the crystalline lens ; and espe-
cially by the patient being able to distinguish objects, and light from
darkness ; but though this is a favourable symptom, yet persons may
have amaurosis, and be able to distinguish day from night, and even
objects from one another. On the whole, it is a very favourable symp-
tom, and when present, the operation may be performed. In general,
when the case is doubtful, you had better perform the operation, of
.course taking care to inform the patient of the state of the case; the
ipam is not great, and you will not leave the patient in a worse state than
(before the operation. It would be extremely culpable for any one to
operate where it was quite apparent that no relief could be afforded;
..ml > et I am sorry to say, that I have known individuals operate where

there was no more chance of doing good than if the eye had been scooped



274



ON THE OPERATION



out of the head — such men are unprincipled, and would undertake any
thing for the purpose of gain.

Another question to be determined on is, whether the operation
should be performed if one eye only is affected ? The answer appears
to be plain, yet there are some who contend that the operation should
be resorted to when there is cataract in one eye only, and their principal
reason is this ; they say, that it is known a sympathy exists between the
two eyes, and that if a morbid action is set up in one, it will be excited
sympathetically in the other, and thus disease be communicated to the
one which is sound, and an operation be required to be performed on it. I
do not think myself that this is a sufficient reason, because, under so little
excitement, the chance of the other being affected is slight. The disad-
vantages of this plan are various ; I know that a sympathy exists between
the eyes, and that if inflammation is set up in one, it will be excited
by sympathy on the other, which may destroy the organ that is sound.
But suppose you succeed, what do you effect ? the focus will be diffe-
rent, and tlie patient will not be able to use both eyes at the same time.
Next, where there is only one eye sound, and it performs its office well,
and vision is good, it will be better to wait till it becomes dim ; then
the operation for restoring the patient to sight may be performed, and
two chances be in the patient’s favour. Therefore it seems that in per-
forming the operation for cataract, where one eye only is affected, you
expose the patient to the risk of losing the sight of both. The plan that
appears to me to be the best is, not to operate except both are affected ;
then you may safely perform the operation.

Before speaking of the operation for cataract, it will be expected
perhaps to premise by saying something of the treatment ; but be-
sides an operation in this complaint very little else in the way of
treatment will be of use. Various plans of treatment have been adopted,
but without success, therefore I shall proceed at once to speak of the
operations. The operations for cataract are three in number— first, de-
pression, or couching, by which the cataract is removed from the axis
of vision ; second, extraction, which consists in making an incision
through the cornea ; third, the operation for the solution of the cataract.

OPERATION FOR DEPRESSION OR COUCHING.

This mode of operating consists in removing the opaque lens out of
the axis of vision by depressing it into the vitreous humour: this is
done by a needle, of which there are three different kinds now employed,
Hey’s, Scarpa’s, and Beer’s needles, lley's needle is about seven-
eighths of an inch in length ; it is rounded except at the point, where it



for depression OR COUCHING. 275

is flat for the eighth of an inch ; it terminates by a semicircular cutting
edge, which ought to be exceedingly sharp.

Scarpa’s needle is more slender than the other, and curved at the
point. When you look at it sideways, it presents a flat convex appear-
ance on the dorsum, it is of a triangular shape towards the point, and
has also a concavity ; it is sufficiently strong to depress the lens. The
next is Beer’s spear-pointed needle ; it is narrow at the neck. I give
the preference myself to this instrument ; a surgeon is not so likely to
wound the ciliary ligaments or processes with it. The needle is the only
instrument required ; some use a speculum, but excepting in children,
this will not be of much use. Previous to the operation, very little
preparation will be necessary; of course, you ascertain whether the
patient is in good health, see that the bowels are regular, and that all
the functions are properly performed. We next come to the mode of
performing the operation. The light, and the position of the patient
and operator, are extremely important and all to be attended to. The
light should be clear, distinct, and full, but not vivid, and it should not
fall on the centre of the eye of the patient but laterally, else it would
produce a dazzling, and unsteadiness of the organ. The patient should
be placed on a low seat with a high back, and the head resting against
it, or the body of an assistant. The operator should be on a high stool,
or at least of sufficient height to enable him to put one foot on it, and
rest his elbow on the knee opposite to the eye to be couched. Having
thus prepared himself, the operator holds the instrument between the
thumb and fore-finger, the assistant passing his fore-finger round the
head of the patient, raises the upper lid by a fold of skin, and presses
it gently against the superciliary ridge. The patient is now directed to
look inwards towards the nose, and the operator resting his little finger
on the upper part of the chin of the patient, penetrates the sclerotic coat
about a line and a half from the junction of the transparent with the
opaque cornea, and a line below the transverse diameter of the eye. In
the first place, the needle is introduced here, just where the retina ter-
minates, and the ciliary ligament commences, so that these shall be
avoided ; and, 2ndly, For the purpose of not wounding the ciliary
artery, as it goes along the middle of the external convexity of the eye-
ball, between the sclerotic and choroid coat. In using Beer’s needle, it
is introduced with the edge laterally, and its surface upwards and down-
wards, and directed towards the middle of the globe of the eye. It must
be moved slightly between the fingers ; a piece of ivory or brass at the
handle, showing the disposition of the cutting edges, and then the point
carried inwards parallel to the iris, and so as to cover the posterior
chamher ; the instrument will be now visible through the pupil. When



276 ON EXTRACTION OF THE CATARACT.

this is the case, the operator must raise the needle upwards, and then
depress it downwards, and backwards, and a little outwards, by which
means the crystalline lens becomes pushed into the vitreous humour. If
the lens should rise from its situation, it must be again depressed, and
when it is safely lodged in the vitreous humour, the needle must be
withdrawn. Some continental surgeons perform the operation of reclina-
tion, which consists in turning the lens over, and pushing the upper edge
backwards, and the lower forwards, and likewise in puncturing the cornea
instead of the sclerotic ; the best plan is that recommended by Scarpa.

The after-treatment is very simple, and consists in a single fold of
linen moistened in cold water being applied to the eye. The patient is
also to be put in a dark apartment, and narrowly watched, in order to
see if inflammation supervenes ; very frequently none arises.

LECTURE XXXVI.

ON EXTRACTION OF THE CATARACT.

This operation was first performed towards the end of the seventeenth
century ; it was not, however, generally known till somewhat later,
when it was brought into repute by Deville, who published the method
of performing it. Considerable improvements were subsequently made
in the mode of performing it by Wenzel, who practised it with great
dexterity, and astonishing success. There seems to be no necessity for
preparing a patient for this operation, beyond taking care that his bowels
be duly evacuated, and that he has not used any unusually stimulating
diet previous to the operation. It would be highly improper to perform
it, if the patient was at the time labouring under any other complaint or
morbid affection ; means should be taken to remove any complaint of
this kind before the operation is attempted. Beyond these precautions,
however, no preparatory treatment will be necessary, though I am
aware, that much stress was formerly laid upon this point. Several
instruments will be required for the performance of this operation, which
is a more complicated one than that to which I before directed your
attention.

In the first place, a cornea knife will be necessary ; the knife used by
Wenzel, was something like a bleeding lancet; the blade, however,
was neither so long nor so broad, and the edges were straight. Ware’s
knife was an improvement on Wenzel’s ; it is much less spear-pointed;
the edges are straight as in Wenzel’s, but while the lower edge is cut-
ting, the superior edge is only cutting towards the point. From the
point towards the handle there was a gradual increase in the size of the



ON EXTRACTION OF THE CATARACT. 277

knife, a circumstance upon which Ware particularly insisted, in order
that the knife, on being carried onwards, might always follow up the
opening, so as to prevent the escape of the aqueous humour. AVenzel s
knife, however, and Ware’s improvement upon it, are greatly inferior
to the knife contrived by Beer, the celebrated oculist of Vienna. This
knife, as you will observe, is very different in shape (the learned gentle-
man exhibited the different instruments to the class) ; the upper edge
is quite straight, while the lower edge is made straight and oblique ;
the whole of the lower edge is cutting; the upper edge is cutting
towards the point, and the size is accurately increased from the point
towards the handle, so as to fill up the opening, and prevent the escape
of the aqueous humour. Beer’s knife is preferable to either of the
others, because there is a much greater extent of cutting surface, so
that the section of the cornea is completed in a shorter time and in a
safer manner ; it is besides capable of being made with much greater
accuracy. A speculum was sometimes used in this operation, but it is
not at all necessary ; in fact, all specula are objectionable, as they are
likely to produce undue pressure on the globe of the eye. The next
instrument is a pair of curved scissors, in order to enlarge the opening
made into the cornea, if it should not be of sufficient size to extract the
cataract. A minute curved needle will be required, in order to scratch
the capsule of the crystalline lens ; a curette, or scoop, to remove any
opaque fragments of the lens, and a pair of minute forceps, of which
the best construction is that recommended by Beer, to extract any por-
tions of opaque membrane from the capsule of the lens. These are the
principal instruments required in this operation. Let us next consider
the mode of performing it. The position of the patient should be nearly
the same as that in the operation for couching ; he should be placed
opposite a window, so as to admit a full, clear, but not too vivid light.
It should not be a reflecting light, so that if the sun should happen to
shine, a north window should be chosen ; the inner side of the eye
towards the nose, where the point of the knife is to be carried through >
should be well brightened. The patient should be seated in a low chair
with a high back, his head resting against it, or firmly supported against
the chest of an assistant. The operator should place himself behind the
patient in a chair of sufficient height to enable him to plant his foot
conveniently on a stool, and resting his elbow on the knee opposite to
the eye to be operated upon, bring his hand towards it. The assistant
should then place his hand behind the patient’s head, and with the ex-
tremity of his fore finger gently raise up the lid without making pressure
on the globe. The operator then takes the knife in bis right hand, if it
be the left eye which is to be operated upon, and in his left, if it be the



278 ON EXTRACTION OF THE CATARACT.

right eye, in the same way as he would take a pencil between his for e
fingers and thumb, resting his little finger upon the malar bone.

The first thing which the operator then does is, to make what is
called the punctuation of the cornea. 1 He introduces the point of the
instrument at the distance of half a line from the anterior junction of
the cornea with the sclerotic coat, and passes it in a direction nearly
parallel to the iris, and before it with a little obliquity, through the an-
terior chamber to the opposite or nasal side. In making the section of
the cornea, the knife should be carried onwards, without any downward
motion ; and as soon as the section is completed, the lid should be al-
lowed to drop over the fore part of the eye, to prevent the escape of a
portion of vitreous humour, if there should be any spasm of the part,
or any unstead}' motion of the patient. The operator waits till the eye
is quiet, and then introduces the curved needle with a convexity under
the flap of the cornea; and turning the point towards the fore part of
the capsule, moves it upwards, and downwards, and laterally from side
to side, making a sort of crucial incision. He then squeezes out the
cataract by making gentle pressure on the globe above and below, until
the lens is lifted from its bed, and passes through the opening of the
cornea upon the cheek of the patient. All that then remains to be done
is to examine whether there are any opaque fragments of the lens left ;
if there are, they must be scooped out by the curette ; if not, the upper
lid is to be rubbed over the surface of the cornea. If there is any por-
tion of opaque membrane remaining, it must be removed by the forceps,
and in this way the operation will be completed. (The learned gentle-
man proceeded to perform the operation exactly in the manner above
described, on the sheep’s eye; which, he observed, was better adapted
for this purpose than the human eye, on account of its being larger and
less flaccid.)

Many untoward circumstances, however, frequently interfere with
the success of this operation. In the first place the section of the cornea
may be too small ; in which case you will either be unable to dislodge
the cataract, or so much force will be required for that purpose as is
likely to produce serious inflammation, and such a degree of disorga-
nization as will destroy vision. The section through the cornea should
be about nine-sixteenths of a line, or one-sixteenth more than half a
line from its junction with the sclerotica; the point of the instrument
is introduced a little below the transverse diameter of the eye, on one
side, and should come out a little above it on the other. If you find,
when you have completed the section of the cornea, that the opening is
not sufficiently large, do not hesitate to use the scissors, in order to
make it large enough to admit the passage of the cataract The second



ON EXTRACTION OF THE CATARACT. 279



untoward circumstance to which I shall advert is, the premature escape
of the aqueous humour, either from the unsteadiness of the operator,
or from some defect in the knife. On the escape of the aqueous humour,
the iris loses its support, and becomes prolapsed. When this happens,
the way of preventing any mischief will be, not to continue the incision,
but to rub the cornea with the point of your finger, by which the pro-
lapsed iris will be stimulated to contract ; and on this being removed
out of the way, you may complete the incision. This is the expedient
recommended by Wenzel and Ware, and it answers the purpose ex-
tremely well. The third unfortunate circumstance which sometimes
occurs is the loss of a portion of the vitreous humour, arising from
some undue pressure on the globe of the eye by the operator or assistant,
or from some spasm of the muscles of the eye, though the last cause
seldom happens. Another way in which this accident sometimes
occurs, is when the needle is injudiciously used too near the circum-
ference of the lens, and the capsule of the vitreous humour is torn
through ; so that when you make pressure on the globe, instead of the
cataract coming forward, a large portion of vitreous humour is pro-
truded. In this case you should not attempt to force out the cataract ;
but you should endeavour to entangle it as much as possible, so as to
prevent the escape of the vitreous humour. The loss of the vitreous
humour is sometimes occasioned by the use of the curette, in conse-
quence of the instrument passing through the back layer of the capsule.
The curette should never be used when the pupil is at all obscured ; the
field of the pupil should be perfectly distinct when you resort to that
instrument. The loss of a small portion of vitreous humour does not
essentially interfere with the success of the operation ; indeed, it has
been said, and perhaps justly, that the loss of a small portion is rather
beneficial than otherwise. It would be an extremely dangerous expe-
riment, however, to endeavour to force out only a certain quantity.
1 he loss of a portion of this humour should not prevent you from com-
pleting the operation in the best possible way, by removing all the loose
fragments of the opaque lens, and the different portions of opaque
membrane or capsule. Another unfortunate circumstance which some-
times happens, is the introduction of the cornea knife between the la-
mellae of the cornea ; the consequence of which will be, that the section
of the cornea will be very small and imperfect. There are various other
circumstances which may interfere with the success of this operation,
which I shall not detain you by mentioning. Dexterity in performing
it can only be acquired by practice. I do not agree with Wenzel, that
you must poke out a hatful of eyes before you can hope to perform this
operation with success; but, undoubtedly, considerable practice is ne-



280



ON SOLUTION OF THE CATARACT.



cessary to enable you to acquire dexterity in performing it. Whenever
any unfortunate circumstance happens, you should be perfectly calm,
cool, and deliberate; close the eye-lid; consider what is best to be done;
and having made up your mind on that point, proceed with firmness
and decision in the operation. With respect to the after-treatment,
your object will be, as far as possible, to prevent inflammation. A
compress of fine linen or cambric, kept wet with cold water, should be
applied to the eyes, or rather to the eye opposite that which has been
operated upon ; it should be fixed by means of a bandage, carried round
from the occiput, crossed in front, and pinned on the sides of the night-
cap. The patient should be carried to bed after the operation ; placed
in the recumbent posture, with his head a little elevated, and the room
should be darkened. He should be allowed nothing but barley-water,
tea, or water-gruel, for the first few days ; and if there should be any
symptoms of inflammation, such as pain, a sensation as if there were
some external body in the eye, accompanied with quickness of pulse, a
quantity of blood should be immediately taken away from the arm. It
will be better not to disturb the bandage, or raise the lid to examine the
eye, for at least three days, unless the patient should feel any consider-
able pain or irritation ; for in that case it would be advisable to ascer-
tain the cause by examining the eye. The patient should be kept in
bed in the recumbent posture for five days, and not even be suffered to
rise for the evacuation of his faeces ; a bed-pan should be used for that
purpose. At the end of that time he may get up to have his bed made.
The best way of preventing irritation is carefully to avoid making any
undue pressure on the globe of the eye. Great care must be taken, in
adjusting the bandage, not to depress the lower lid, by which means
the section of the cornea may be brought over, and the adaptation of
the cut edges prevented. Loose eye-lashes are sometimes a source of
irritation, and it will be right to examine whether there are any such
before the operation ; if there should be any tendency to inversion of
the lid, you may prevent the lid from rubbing against the surface of the
globe by means of a bit of adhesive plaster fastened to the cheek. I
have already stated that I do not advise you to operate if one eye is
sound ; nor do I think it right, if there should be a cataract in each
eye, to operate on both at once, unless the patient should particularly
desire it.

OF THE OPERATION FOR PROCURING SOLUTION OF THE
CATARACT.

The third operation is that for procuring solution of the cataract,
which, as it is particularly adapted to the cataracts of children, leads



ON SOLUTION OF THE CATARACT.



281



me to make some observations in this place on congenital cataract.
Children are not unfrequently either born with cataract, or with a dispo-
sition to cataract, which speedily makes its appearance. Indeed it is
not common to find an absolute opacity of the lens, or of the capsule
containing it, at the birth of the child ; the cataract usually makes its
appearance within a few months, or at least within the first few years,
from the birth of the child. In some instances there seems an heredi-
tary predisposition to this disease, several children in the same family
being affected with it. The nature of the cataract may be firm, soft, or
fluid ; and it may be lenticular or capsular, as in the adult. By far
the most common form, however, according to Dr. Saunders, who has
given particular attention to cataract in children, is the capsular. In
general, he found the lens itself more or less absorbed, the anterior and
posterior layers of the capsule being opaque and adhering. The ap-
pearance of the cataract is somewhat different from that in the adult ;
there is an opaque nucleus either at the centre or some part of the cir-
cumference, and the rest has an unequal opacity, or streaked reticulated
appearance. Another circumstance peculiar to congenital cataract is
the unsteadiness and constant motion of the eye, which it is not difficult
to explain. The eye has never been accustomed to have its vision fixed
by objects, unless, perhaps, very imperfectly, and consequently the will
ha3 never been in the habit of influencing the muscles which give direc-
tion to the globe of the eye. Hence, its unsteady and constant motion.
It was formerly deemed advisable to defer the operation for cataract in
children, but Dr. Saunders has introduced a mode of operating in these
cases which may be resorted to at any age. This is certainly one of the
greatest improvements which has been made in this branch of surgery,
not only because vision is extremely important for the purposes of edu-
cation, but because, if the operation be delayed, a very considerable time
will elapse before the patient can acquire a command over the eye, in
consequence of the want of voluntary influence over the muscles. An-
other, and more forcible reason, why this operation should not be de-
layed, is, that it is an universal law in the economy of nature, that all
parts which are not exercised lose more or less of power ; and, conse-
quently, the retina, from not being accustomed to receive the impres-
sions of light, loses a considerable portion of its power. Dr. Saunders
found that in many casps where this operation had been delayed, the
patients retained no more power of vision than wus sufficient to enable
them to distinguish between light and darkness. The operation may
in general be performed with a hope of success between the age of
eighteen months and four years. Dr. Saunders's mode of operating is
not confined to the cataracts of children ; it may be employed also iti



282



ON SOLUTION OF THE CATARACT.

the cataracts of adults, provided they are fluid, soft, or membranous
cataracts.

I do not mean to say that this operation is entirely new ; if you read
Mr. Pott’s works, you will find that, in some instances, he performed a
very similar operation. He tells you that, in cases where the cataract
was too soft for depression, he sometimes lacerated the anterior layers of
the capsule, so as to admit the aqueous humour and procure the solu-
tion of the cataract. Hey, Scarpa, and Ware, have performed similar
operations. W e are not, however, to consider those as the inventors of
any practice who have merely employed it here and there, without
stating any certain rules for its general applicability. It is to Dr.
Saunders that we are indebted for having shown the principle on which
he performed this particular operation, its applicability to cataract in
children, and to some cases of cataract in adults. Dr. Saunders, there-
fore, may be justly considered as the inventor of this operation, and is
entitled to our respect and admiration for the introduction of so material
an improvement in this branch of surgery. The operation is very sim-
ple; it consists merely in making an opening in the anterior layer of
the capsule of the lens, breaking up more or less the texture of the
cataract, and admitting the aqueous humour in which the cataract is
dissolved, and by this means absorbed. It may be more properly called
an operation for the absorption, than for the solution of the cataract,
since absorption is the ultimate object of it. The instrument required
is a needle, very similar to that employed in the operation for couch-
ing ; the point, however, is somewhat different ; its shoulders are made
cutting. It will be right, before the operation, to use belladonna for
the purpose of dilating the pupil, so that the cataract may be distinctly
seen. A small quantity of the extract of belladonna, softened to the
consistence of cream, may be introduced into the eye, or smeared round
the lids. In operating on the adult, the patient should be placed in the
same position as in the operation for couching ; children are better
placed in the recumbent posture, with the head fixed on a pillow.
Sometimes a speculum is required to steady the eye ; Pellier’s specu-
lum is the best for this purpose. The needle may be introduced either
in the same way as in the operation for couching, or else through the
cornea. In the latter case there are two modes of operating, called the
anterior and the posterior. In the former the needle is introduced at
the distance of half a line from the junction of the cornea with the
sclerotica, carried parallel to the iris, and turned inwards, so as to break
up a portion of the capsule of the lens. In the posterior operation the
needle is carried through the posterior chamber, a little behind the iris,
and the texture of the capsule is broken up in the same way, so ns to



ON SOLUTION OF THE CATARACT.



283



admit the aqueous humour. If the cataract be fluid, it immediately
mixes with the aqueous humour, and you will have no more trouble.
As to the after-treatment, your object must be, as in the former cases,
to prevent inflammation. It is better in this operation not to attempt
to do too much at once ; but rather to repeat it frequently, than to break
up the texture too extensively at once.

Having described these different operations, it may be necessary to
consider which of them it may be most expedient to adopt. It seems
to me that in those cases which admit of the operation for solution,
namely, fluid, soft, and most cases of membranous cataract, that ope-
ration is greatly preferable to any other. Soft, fluid, and membranous
cataract cannot be depressed. It is true that the operation for extrac-
tion might be performed, but it is to be considered that the operation
for solution is much more easy, and that it does very little injury to
the eye. In firm cataracts, where it is a matter of indifference whether
the operation for depression or extraction should be performed, that for
extraction, supposing it to be equally well performed, is undoubtedly
preferable, because the disease is entirely removed by it. It is not
always, however, a matter of indifference, for there are many cases in
which it would be extremely imprudent to attempt the operation for
extraction, as, for instance, in cases of adhesion of the iris to the cornea,
or where the cornea is very flat, and the anterior chamber necessarily
small, or in cases of contraction of the pupil, myosis, or arcus senilis.
There are some cases in which the unsteadiness of the eye is so great,
either from spasmodic motions to which the patient is subject, or lastly,
where there is such indocility in the patient, either from invincible fear
or stupidity, that it will not be advisable to attempt the operation. I
am led to these remarks, in consequence of my having operated in this
hospital on a woman who had cataract in both eyes. When the opera-
tion was proposed to her she immediately consented, and, supposing
that she would have sufficient resolution to go through with it, I sat
down with perfect confidence to perform the operation for extraction.
She no sooner, however, felt the pain — pain it can scarcely be called —
the uneasiness, rather, arising from the application of the instrument —
than she could not keep her head at all steady, but threw herself into
all sorts of postures. I succeeded, with great difficulty, in making a
very indifferent section of the cornea, and in extracting the cataract
from the eye. I know not what induced me to be so indiscreet, after
the specimen I had had of this patient’s firmness, to attempt the ope-
ration on the other eye. I did so, however, and if the patient was un-
steady during the first operation, she was ten times more so during the
second. The consequence was, that though I completed the section of



284 OPERATION FOR ARTIFICIAL PUPIL.

the cornea in the second, I found I could not proceed without the risk
of doing considerable injury to the part ; and I thought it best to leave
the cataract in its place. Where there are no contra-indications to deter
us from performing the operation for extraction, it is undoubtedly the
most effectual operation, as it completely removes the. disease ; but then
it requires much more skill and dexterity than the operation of depres-
sion ; and the want of sufficient skill is more likely to prove injurious to
the patient. The operation for depression is extremely easy, but it has
its disadvantages. Not unfrequently the cataract rises again, and it will
be necessary to repeat the operation. If the cataract be depressed on
the retina, the patient will experience constant pain, which sometimes
terminates in amaurosis. It sometimes happens after the operation for
couching that the patient is seized with vomiting, accompanied with
acute pain. This has been supposed to be the consequence of wound-
ing the ciliary nerves. I know not whether this opinion is well-founded,
but it commonly happens, when the operation is followed by vomiting,
that the cataract rises again. No judicious surgeon will, indiscrimi-
nately, prefer one mode of operation to another ; his opinion must be
decided by the nature of each particular case. In general, where the
nature of the cataract admits of it, the operation for solution is prefer-
able. In cases where the operation for extraction is not contra-indicated
it will be preferable to that of depression, if the surgeon has had suffi-
cient opportunities of acquiring dexterity ; but if he has not been much
in the habit of performing the operation, I should recommend as the
safer, though less effectual course, the operation for depression.

I shall here describe the

OPERATION FOR ARTIFICIAL PUPIL.

Where, from some defect of the cornea or iris, or the parts connected
with them, there is no passage for the rays of light, the operation for
artificial pupil is required, which consists in making a section with a
cutting Iieedle, through the iris, which, by the elasticity of its fibres,
separates the edges, and makes a passage for the rays of light. Chesel-
den was the first surgeon who performed this. There are three modes
of performing the operation : — 1st, by a simple incision of the iris,
technically called corotomia; 2dly, where a portion of the iris is cut
away, which operation is called coreclomia : 3dly, where the iris is
turned away from its attachment to the ciliary ligament, which is called
coredialysis. The simple incision of the iris is seldom resorted to ; the
operation of excision of a part of the iris was recommended by Mr.
Gibson, and is certainly the best when the case admitted of it. Mr.
Gibson’s mode of performing it is to make an incision with a knife, as



ON FUNGUS H NEMATODES OF THE EYE. 285

near as possible to the iris, and then, making gentle pressure on the
globe of the eye, so as to protrude the iris, to snip off a portion with a
pair of scissors. If the iris was adherent, so that it could not be pro-
truded, he hooked it forward with a little hook, and then snipped away
a portion with the scissors. The operation of separating a part of the
iris from its attachment to the ciliary ligament may be performed with
Scarpa’s needle. The needle should be introduced on the outer side
through the cornea, at the distance of two lines from its junction with
the sclerotica, and carried across the anterior chamber parallel to the
plane of the iris. The point is then to be directed through the iris
towards the inner side, and then, carrying it backwards and outwards,
the iris is to be detached from the ciliary ligament. The excision of a
portion of the iris is the preferable operation, but where the case does
not admit of it, the detachment of the iris from the ciliary ligament is
the next best operation. It is impossible to lay down general rules for
these operations in a lecture, for the cases are so infinitely varied that
much must, after all, be left to the discretion of the surgeon, who
should adapt the nature of the operation to the circumstances of each
particular case.



LECTURE XXXVII.

ON FUNGUS H-iEMATODES OF THE EYE.

The first disease to which I shall call your attention is the fungus hae-
matodes of the eye, malignant fungus, or, as it is called by some, me -
dullary sarcoma, a disease which soon proves fatal unless an operation
be early performed, and even then the chance of success is extremely
doubtful. No age appears exempt from this complaint, but it more
frequently attacks the young ; and a large proportion of the cases occurs
before twelve years of age.

SYMPTOMS OF FUNGUS HiEMATODES OF THE EYE.

The first circumstance which attracts the notice of the patient is the
vision becoming impaired. Onlooking into the eye at the commencement
of this complaint, you sec opposite to the pupil, and deeply seated,
an appearance like a mirror, resembling an opacity of the lens, from
which it is difficult to distinguish it. If you watch the progress of this
disease, you will sec that this appearance enlarges into a prominence,
proceeding from the bottom of the eye towards the cornea, and as it
reaches the lens, you must be the more on your guard that you do not
mistake it for cataract. There is one appearance, however, at this stage



286 ON FUNGUS HjEMATODES OF THE EYE.

by which you can distinguish the one from the other upon the opaque
substance, or the retina, of which its covering consists, branches of the
arteria centralis retinae may be seen ramifying. The other symptoms
are loss of vision, and the iris remaining immoveable. As the promi-
nence enlarges, the iris becomes protruded, and the cornea distended.
The conjunctiva becomes inflamed, the eye-lids vascular, and in a dis-
eased state ; and in process of time the cornea sloughs, an opening is
formed, and a discharge of a ropy mucus first takes place.

The fungus does not always protrude through the cornea, but some-
times through the sclerotic, and then it has a purple, livid hue, and is
covered by the conjunctiva. When the fungus increases in size, it as-
sumes a dark red colour, its surface is unequal, and irregular ; it bleeds
at the slightest touch ; the parts slough, and then there is a fetid,
sanious discharge. During the progress of the complaint, the health
becomes affected, the countenance puts on a sallow hue, and the patient
wastes in flesh. This disease is accompanied, and generally preceded,
by disorder of the digestive organs ; the' appetite is impaired ; and
there are present all the other marks of derangement of the general
health. When the strength and health are broken up, the disease very
soon comes to a termination. The close of the disease is preceded by
hectic fever ; as is that of most complaints from which the general
health has suffered much during their progress. In fungus of the eye,
the rest is completely destroyed, there is an affection of the nervous
system : and in children, convulsions come on, which terminate their
existence. In all stages of the disease, there is a tendency to them, and
they generally prove destructive to life.

If you examine the appearances of the eye, you will find little difference
in them from those of fungus in any other part. There is a grumous ap-
pearance on the surface, and the fungus bears a striking resemblance to
the medullary matter of the brain ; not unlike cream to the sight. The
appearances, however, vary in different forms of the complaint. No one
texture of the eye is free from it. It frequently commences from the
optic nerve, extends to the retina, sclerotic and choroid coats ; but, on
examining a fungus of the eye, it would be difficult to say where it be-
gan, the disorganization is so complete ; the retina is destroyed — the
humours are absorbed — the choroid protrudes, and very little of the
natural texture is left. (Here the learned gentleman exhibited to the
class specimens, which showed the different appearances in the different
forms of the disease.) In the case from which one specimen was taken,
Mr. H. Cline extirpated the eye ; the patient was a Portuguese. The
greater part of the anterior chamber is filled with a dark substance, like
the pigmentum nigrum. In this man, however, the disease returned.



CANCER OF THE EYE.



287



In some instances, you will find the disease extending along the optic
nerve, which enlarges, becomes altered in texture — of a brown colour —
and reaches the brain, which will also be affected by the disease. The
only remedy in this disease is the extirpation of the eye, and this in the
early stage. In most cases, the operation proves unsuccessful, in con-
sequence of its not being performed sufficiently early, or before there is
a disposition in the constitution to reproduce the disease.

There is another disease which requires extirpation of the eye ;
therefore, I shall speak of it first, and then describe the operation.

CANCER OF THE EYE.

By cancer of the eye is meant, not cancer of the globe of the eye, for
it rarely or ever commences in it ; but it begins in the appendages and
conjunctiva, and then extends to the globe of the eye; but I repeat that
this disease scarcely ever makes its appearance first in the globe ; its
common seat is in the conjunctiva. Cancer of the eye at the onset resem-
bles a warty tumour with an ulcer on its surface, which has exactly the
same appearances as ulcers in other parts of the body ; therefore it will
not be necessary for me to describe them : it then extends not only to
the globe of the eye, but to the palpebral ling, the lachrymal gland, the
periosteum of the bones forming the orbit, and the antrum ; in fact, the
globe, and its appendages, become one entire mass of disease.

No good can be expected in the treatment of this complaint unless
the cancer be early removed by the knife. In the progress of the disease
the general health becomes broken up. I shall now proceed to show
you the operation for the removal of the eye.

EXTIRPATION OF THE EYE.

Although this operation appears formidable, and is so to the patient,
3S it is a most painful one, yet it is not difficult of execution. The best
mode of performing it is as follows : — The patient is to be placed in the
sitting posture, or, at any rate, with the head elevated, and in order to
steady the eye, or shift its position, if necessary, you are to pass a needle,
armed with a ligature, through the fore part of the globe of the eye, by
which means- you can readily steady it, or move it from one side to the
other. If the lids arc contracted, or the eye-ball is exceedingly large, it
will be necessary to divide the outer angle in order to facilitate the
operation. An assistant raises the upper lid, and the operator then
introduces a double-edged straight knife through the conjunctiva, and
divides the cellular membrane as extensively as he can. He next cuts
through the oblique muscles ; and having done this, he then divides the
recti muscles and the optic nerve ; to complete this last step of the



288



HORDEOLUM.



operation, a curved knife adapted for the purpose, is used, and the
globe of the eye is thus easily extracted. It seldom happens that any
hemorrhage takes place which may not be stopped by dossils of lint.
The lids are to be brought in apposition, a compress of linen is to be
applied over the eye ; inflammation should be guarded against, and the
patient should not be neglected ; for although inflammation does not
frequently supervene after the operation, yet it sometimes comes on,
extends to the membranes of the brain, and proves fatal.

Having now concluded the morbid affections of the globe of the eye,
I shall proceed to speak of those of its appendages, and first of the
eye-lids.

HORDEOLUM.

One of the most common affections of the eye-lids is that known by
the name of stye, or hordeolum, from its resemblance to a barley-corn.
It consists of a small abscess in the lid, and is produced by an obstruc-
tion in the follicles of Meibomius : the secretion from the part is al-
tered, becomes inspissated, lodges on the lid, excites irritation, inflam-
mation, and the process of suppuration ; lastly, the small abscess breaks,
and matter is discharged. In most instances the suppuration is confined
to a small space, but in others it puts on the character of a boil, and
sloughing of the cellular membrane then takes place. Some persons
are more prone to this disease than others ; it frequently appears in
those who have been subject to disorder of the digestive organs, or in
those of a scrofulous habit of body, and young persons. This morbid
affection would be of little consequence in itself, but for the state of the
system on which it generally depends. The eye-lids adhere to each
other in the mornings, which distresses the patient considerably. There
may be excoriation of the lids — redness and thickening of the conjunc-
tiva — excoriation of the skin of the face ; lippitudinous ulcers break
out ; the cilia becomes altered in their growth, and turned inwards on
the globe of the eye ; and from these different states a tendency to
chronic ophthalmia is kept up. It is necessary when styes are attended
with inflammation and redness, that cold applications, poultices, and
fomentations should be applied, as in other inflammations ; and when
matter is formed, that the abscess should be opened with a lancet. But
it more frequently happens that this affection depends upon something
wrong in the system, on derangement of the digestive organs, or im-
paired functions in some part of the body ; and then these states must
be attended to, for they produce irritation, and sometimes ulceration of
the edges of the eye-lids. The best local applications that can be made
use of, are those of a mild stimulating nature, the mercurial ointments,



ENTROPIUM.



289



with a little of which the edges of the lid should be besmeared every
night at bed-time, the parts being previously washed with tepid water.
The citrine ointment, (the unguentum hydrargyri nitratis ) is the one in
common use ; but it is in its proper state too stimulating for the eyes,
therefore it must be diluted with some simple ointment. Both the red
and white precipitate mercurial ointments are used, and the zinc oint-
ment also ; in fact, it is not essential what kind is employed, if it be
mildly stimulating.



TRICHIASIS.

Another affection of which I shall speak, is that known by the name
of trichiasis. It is that state of the eye-lashes, in which they become
altered in growth, and turned inwards on the globe of the eye, irritating
the conjunctiva on every motion of the eye. Some think that this com-
plaint is not owing to the effect of the altered growth of the cilia only,
but to a turning in of the lids, called

ENTROPIUM.

Entropium, or inversion of the eye-lids, is produced from ulceration
of the tarsi, the cicatrices formed by the healing of lippitudinous ulcers
which alter the shape of the lids, so that the eye-lashes are turned in-
wards, irritate the conjunctiva, and produce a continual state of irri-
tation of the whole organ. There is a watering of the eye, together with
chronic ophthalmia, and in a short time vessels may be seen shooting
over the cornea ; nebula and ulceration of the cornea supervene, and
thus a serious state of irritation of the transparent part of the eye is
produced. Where the affection is simple trichiasis, the only means that
can be relied on, is to pluck away the eye-lashes ; some benefit may be
derived from applying a piece of adhesive plaster to the lid, which is to
be fastened to the cheek, so that the eye-lashes may be kept bent out -
wards. The best forceps for removing the eye.lashes is this, (Mr. Green
exhibited it to the class) one rather broad at the points. But when the
lid itself is inverted you must do more, and, 1 believe, nothing will be
of any use except cutting away a piece of skin from the affected lid ;
for when this is done, the edges of the wound are brought together by
strips of adhesive plaster ; a cicatrix is formed, and the eye-lids are then
drawn upwards. The mode of performing the operation is very simple;
you must lift a portion of the skin of the affected lid with a pair of for-
ceps that has towards the point transverse branches, and which are
grooved as you here see (holding it up) ; with this you lay a firm hold,
of the portion of the lid, and all you have to do is, to take a pair of
curved scissors, and cut off the projecting portion, as near to the edge



290



ON FISTULA LA CHRYMALIS.



of the lid as you can. (The operation was then performed before the
class.) We next come to the opposite side of the lids.

ECTROPIUM.

Ectropium, or eversion of the lids, happens from ulceration on their
edges, an altered and vitiated secretion from the follicles of Meibomius,
which produce a redness and an altered state of the conjunctiva, and
from cicatrices and contractions of the skin of the lids, which tend to
evert them. This complaint is very distressing to the patient ; the eye
has not its natural covering; irritation, from extraneous bodies getting
into it, is produced, and thus a constant state of chronic ophthalmia is
kept up. When the disease is brought on by a thickened state of the
conjunctiva lining the lid, you must remove that portion ; if from a
cicatrix, it must be divided ; but it will be proper to state that this
seldom answers ; the divided cicatrix recontracts, and the disease re-
turns. The plan usually adopted consists in removing a triangular
portion of the lid, just in the same way as the operation fox cancer of
the lip is performed ; by cutting through a piece of lid which is raised
by a pair of forceps, so that the base shall be towards the edge of the
lid, and the apex below, at the union of the two sides. A suture is
applied through the incision, the edges of the wound are brought toge-
ther; these united, tend to keep the lid in the natural position ; and,
in fact, the operation, in this way, is often successful.

Now, gentlemen, 1 have gone through the various affections of the
tunics of the eye, with those of the globe of the eye, and the lids, with
the exception of a description of the small tumours, which are often to
be met with on them, such as encysted tumours, and others. But as
these require no particular plan of treatment different from those in
other parts of the body, I shall not detain you about them. In their
removal, you must bear one thing in mind, viz. the importance of the
organ, in the neighbourhood of which they are situated, so that in re-
moving them, you do not injure so delicate a part. The last disease to
which I shall call your attention is

FISTULA LACHRYMAL1S.

By this term is understood all obstructions of the lachrymal passage
preventing the natural flow of the tears and mucus from the eyes to the
nose. The most common cause of this complaint is a closure of one of
the puncta, and then there is epiphora, or a watering of the eye, toge-
ther with suffusion of the tears, and the surgeon consequently discovers
that one of the puncta is closed. This must be punctured by a small
sharp pin, made of gold or silver, which is to be pushed through it to



SUPPURATION OF THE LACHRYMAL SAC. 291



the lachrymal sac : the obstruction is removed, and the epiphora re-
lieved. When the epiphora continues, the eye becomes irritable, a
drooping of the lids comes on, and an altered state of the lachrymal sac
is produced. The most important source of this complaint is obstruction
of the ductus ad nasum. The original seat, then, is in the duct leading
from the lachrymal sac to the nose, and the tears, instead of finding
their way to the nose, flow down the cheek ; this symptom may, however,
arise from a polypus in the nose, and then it will be relieved by the re-
moval of the polypus. One of the symptoms of malignant fungus of
the nose is suffusion of tears from pressure in the nasal canal ; this dis-
ease terminates fatally, and if removed it returns ; in this complaint the
flow of tears is a very unimportant symptom, compared with the original
disease which gives rise to it. But sometimes there is inflammation of
the bones of the nose, or periosteum covering them, and the membrane
lining the duct, which is thickened, and then the duct becomes more or
less obstructed. It not unfrequently takes place in persons of a scro-
fulous habit, and those who are subject to affections of the covering of
the bones. It is also sometimes a consequence of the abuse of mercury.

Fistula lachrymalis may be divided into three stages: — 1st, where
there is only simple distension of the lachrymal sac. 2dly, where there
are inflammation and suppuration of the sac. And the third stage is
that in which there is a fistulous opening leading from the sac to the
cheek.



SIMPLE DISTENSION OF THE LACHRYMAL SAC.

The first symptom which leads the patient, in this stage, to observe
any thing amiss with the eye, is, that on reading or exposing it to the
wind, there is a watering of the eye ; in a short time, this becomes con-
stant, and then a swelling appears at the inner corner of the eye, arising
from distension of the lachrymal sac, the tears collecting in it. These
produce irritation ; mucus and purulent matter is secreted; but when
the sac protrudes, pressure made on it pushes the tears or mucus either
through the puncta, over the face, or down the nose. The complaint
sometimes remains in this stage for many years (pressure being occa-
sionally made on the sac to empty it) with only little inconvenience.
1 rom the pressure of the distended sac, and obstruction of the nasal
duct continuing, or some accidental cause, irritation is excited, and the
second stage produced.

INFLAMMATION AND SUPPURATION OF THE LACHRYMAL SAC.

'Ihis affection is attended by a pufflness of the inner corner of the
eye, redness of the surrounding skin, which becomes swollen and hard,



292 SUPPURATION OF THE LACHRYMAL SAC.

irom the effusion of lymph. Suppuration having commenced in the
sac, ulceration comes on, and the matter effects an external opening,
by which it is discharged. Now, obstruction, inflammation, and sup-
puration do not always take place in the course of the ductus ad nasum ,
from ordinary causes ; but the progress of the complaint, when arising
from ordinary and from specific causes, will be different. An opening
being thus made in the sac, it is rendered permanent, or kept open, by
the flow of pus and tears out of the wound, over the cheek ; the disease
then arrives at the third stage.

FISTULOUS OPENING FROM THE SAC TO THE CHEEK.

In this stage of the complaint, the patient is distressed a good deal by
frequent returns of inflammation and suppuration of the sac.

Treatment — Although various means have been attempted in the
cure of this complaint, no plan has been yet laid down that has proved
successful ; or at least the benefit to be derived from the means and
treatment recommended is in most cases very slight. In many cases
little need be done but to evacuate the sac, for the purpose of prevent-
ing irritation in those cases where there is simple distension of the sac.
One cause of this complaint is a vitiated state of the follicles of Mei-
bomius : when matter is secreted, and the eye-lids are closed together,
and irritation is thus produced in the lachrymal sac — in these cases the
lids should be washed with tepid water, and besmeared every night at
bed-time, with a little of the unguentum hydrargyri nitratis. By this
means, and attending to the constitution, and removing irritation as it
arises, the patient may remain in that state for years. When the ob-
struction is complete, the distension considerable, the attacks of inflam-
mation frequent, and suppuration has commenced, another kind of
treatment must be adopted : in this stage the object of your treatment
will be to effect a natural passage for the flow of the tears, that is,
through the nasal duct, instead of their flowing over the face. Anel is
the first who attempted to procure a passage for the matter and tears
into the sac, when the natural one was obstructed; and this he did by
introducing a very fine probe through one of the puncta and the lachry-
mal sac to the ductus ad nasum, and thus dilated the scricture; but the
instrument was so flexible and thin, that it was ill calculated to over-
come the obstruction. My friend, Mr. Travers, who has had most ex-
tensive opportunities of watching the progress and trying the effect of
different treatments in this disease, recommends the use of an instru-
ment of this kind ; it is, however, somewhat different ; it is more nail-
headed, and not of the same exceeding fineness, being more effectual for
removing the obstruction. Anel likewise constructed a small syringe,



SUPPURATION OF THE LACHRYMAL SAC. 293

the mouth of which was to be introduced into one of the puncta, tepid
water was then to be injected through the punctum and sac to the nasal
duct ; but the injection of fluid was found inadequate to overcome the
obstruction. It is a useful instrument in glcety discharges from the sac
or duct, but beyond this it is quite inefficient.

Mr. Wathen recommended that a hollow metallic tube should be in-
troduced into the ductus ad nasum ; the object of its being hollow was
to allow the passage of tears through it, but it was found inadequate ;
it soon became filled with mucus. M. Dupuytren is in the habit of
using a gold tube in this way, and it is said that most of his cases are
cured ; this, I should doubt, and in one case I know it did not succeed.
Mr. Pott also advised the use of bougies for removing the obstruction.
The plan laid down by Mr. Ware is the one now generally adopted ; it
consists of introducing a nail-headed style into the ductus ad nasum ,
and letting it remain there. The style should be just large enough to
allow of the flow of the tears by the side of it. If no opening has been
made from the repeated inflammation, the mode you will adopt to make
one is as follows : you direct the patient to be seated, and then standing
behind him, you pass your hand round the patient’s head, open the la-
chrymal sac, and then carry a blunt pointed bistoury inwards and down-
wards and divide the obstruction ; the instrument with which you make
the external opening is a phymosis knife. Having done this, you ascer-
tain whether the passage is free, and then introduce a nail-headed style
about an inch and three-eighths long ; the head of the style is to lay
obliquely on the front of the cheek, and a piece of adhesive plaster spread
on black silk to be put over it, which will prevent persons from suspect-
ing that there is any thing wrong with the eye. The style requires to
be removed once-day, for the first week, and to be washed ; sometimes
there is little irritation produced by its introduction ; but, in general,
there is none, and the comfort the patient experiences is very great ; the
water ceases to flow over the cheek — the sight becomes stronger — the
tendency to inflammation is obviated ; and, indeed, so much comfort is
experienced that the patient is loth to dispense with the use of the style.
Although the relief obtained from this plan is great, yet it was in re-
ference to it that I said just now that no plan of treatment had yet been
decided on which generally proved successful ; for this mode must be
considered more in the light of a palliative than a curative remedy; the
obstruction frequently returning when the style is removed. It some-
times happens that from disease about the bones of the nose, a fistulous
opening from the sac to the nose is formed. If you should operate in
such a case, you must introduce a sharp-pointed instrument, either a
probe or tTocar, through the fore part of the os unguis into the nose,

c C 2



294



ON URINARY CALCULI.



and the only point which remains is to keep open the perforation by a
sponge tent, or nail-headed style ; but it becomes rarely necessary to
perform this operation. I have now, gentlemen, concluded the subject
of diseases of the eye.



LECTURE XXXVIII.

ON URINARY CALCULI.

These are found in four different situations in the urinary organs, viz.
in the kidney , ureter , bladder , and urethra.

The calculi which are discovered in the prostate gland are not, in
general, of the same kind as those met with in the organs which I have
just named.

CALCULI IN THE KIDNEY.

When a calculus is situated in the kidney, there will be felt consider-
able pain in the loins, in the vicinity of this organ, and occasionally it
will be so very acute, and the part so exquisitely tender, that the
afflicted person cannot allow even the slight pressure of a clothes-brush
over the loins. A physician of my acquaintance informed me that he
had witnessed a case of this description, in which the only symptom that
served to illustrate the nature of the disease, was the extreme tenderness
felt in the loins, and it was so severe that the patient could not suffer
his clothes to be brushed over the part ; upon examination of his body,
after death, a stone was found in the kidney.

When a calculus is situated in the kidney, it is often accompanied by
a numbness of the intestinal tube leading from the kidney to the navel.
There will likewise be felt great pain when in the act of stooping, with
frequent inclination to make water. The urine is frequently of a dark
colour, from being mixed with blood ; when this appearance is present,
coupled with excruciating pain round the loins, it will generally happen
that the stone is then in the act of descending, and in a few days after-
wards you will probably find that it has entered the bladder. When a
calculus is in the kidney, the stomach is usually very much affected,
and frequent vomiting is the consequence. The urinary bladder is
often, from the same cause, rendered exceedingly irritable; and all
means that could be devised have been known to fail in procuring relief
from this troublesome symptom. An example of this kind occurred
when I lived in the city ; a surgeon called, and requested me to see a
boy, a patient of his, who had an extremely irritable bladder ; he stated
that he had tried every medicine he could think of, and yet could not



ON CALCULI IN THE KIDNEY.



295



produce the slightest mitigation of the boy’s sufferings. I saw the
child, and prescribed for him ; but with as little effect, and he ulti-
mately died. I met the practitioner a short time after, who told me
that, upon a post-mortem examination, the pelvic, abdominal, and
thoracic viscera were all healthy, with the exception of one kidney,
in which was found a calculus. I have known a stone in the kidney
cause severe pain at the anterior superior spinous process of the
ilium.

In cases of calculi in the kidney, nature generally makes attempts to
discharge them through abscesses formed in the loins. I had three cal-
culi in my possession, which were discharged in this manner, and as they
came directly from the kidney, I was anxious to learn the nature of their
composition. I therefore sent them to the late Dr. Marcet, who, upon
analyzing them, found that each was composed of the triple or am-
moniaco-magnesian phosphate.

Calculi in the kidney sometimes produce such a derangement of the
constitution, as to occasion the destruction of life ; and, upon dissecting
persons who have been thus destroyed, the calculi have been met with in
various parts of the kidney, in the tubuli uriniferi, infundibula, and in its
pelvis. Sometimes calculi in the kidney are modelled to the internal
form of that gland. It happens thus — when the stone has become of
sufficient bulk to fill the pelvis, projections branch off from its body into
the infundibula, acquiring the character which you here observe (hold-
ing up a preparation.)

It is not uncommon for a calculus to occasion an absorption of the
glandular substance of the kidney, and a stone lodged upon the begin-
ning of the ureter has been known to have produced so complete an
absorption of the glandular structure, that no more than a thin membrane
has remained.

When both kidneys are affected at the same period, or if they succes-
sively become destroyed, in either case death must ensue.

TREATMENT OF CALCULI IN THE KIDNEY.

But little can be accomplished by the medical man in these affec-
tions ; when the stone, however, is composed of uric acid, the exhibi-
tion of potass or soda i3, I believe, attended with considerable ad-
vantage; not that either of these medicines will dissolve a stone when
once formed, but I am inclined to believe that they prevent the fur-
ther deposition of uric acid ; they most decidedly lessen the irritability
oi tile urinary organs and by covering the surface of the stone with a
sort of mortar, it becomes much less annoying to the patient, and much



296



ON CALCULI IN THE URETER.



less irritating to the part in which it is contained. Beyond these effects
I think lithontriptics have no power.

Surgical writers have proposed that stones in the kidney should be
removed by the knife. I am not aware, however, that such operations
have been performed. Mr. Cline, sen., once informed me that he had a
patient under his care, in whose kidney he could distinctly feel a calcu-
lus. This person was remarkably thin, owing to which circumstance
the stone was discoverable by means of an external examination : an
individual so situated, if his constitution were in a healthy condition,
might successfully undergo the operation, otherwise it would be too
much for his system to bear. Nature, as I before observed to you, will
often effect a cure by the formation of abscesses — the calculi being per-
mitted to escape through the sinuses which they create. Through these
openings, by means of a probe, you may readily feel the calculus ; and
to prevent the closure of the sinus by granulations, you should introduce
a sponge tent. In order to facilitate the discharge of the stone, you
may dilate the sinus by means of a bistoury ; there will be no danger in
doing this, for the emulgent artery and vein are situated behind the cal-
culus. Well, this is all that I have to say respecting stone in the kid-
ney, and I shall proceed to the consideration of

CALCULI IN THE URETER.

When the stone has descended into the ureter, there will be felt great
pain at the spine of the ilium, at the anterior superior spinous process,
in the course of the psoas muscle, and over the surface of the abdomen;
as the calculus passes along the ureter, at the time it crosses the lumbar
plexus, there will be experienced very, very great uneasiness in the
groin, and in the course of the anterior crural nerve down the thigh ;
when it goes over the spermatic plexus, the cremaster will be spasmo-
dically contracted, and there will be felt severe pain in the testicle ; the
stomach will likewise be particularly irritable, and continually eject its
contents ; the skin covered with cold sweats, with a death-like paleness
of the countenance ; the pain is not constant, but comes on at intervals ;
after continuing for some minutes, a complete remission occurs, and
you therefore suspect that the stone has passed ; after a lapse, however,
of ten or fifteen minutes, it returns with as much severity as before. I
have known an instance in which the violence of the pain was so great
from a calculus in the ureter, that the patient absolutely laid down on
the ground, and rolled about, so intense was the agony, and though not
more than a quarter of a mile from his residence, he was under the
necessity of being carried to his house by the servants. The symptoms



ON CALCULI IN THE URETER. 297

which have been just mentioned, teach you, most unequivocally, that a
stone exists in the ureter.

It not unfrequently happens that nature fails in her attempts to re-
lieve ; the disease then necessarily terminates in the destruction of life.
One case of this kind has been witnessed by Mr. Hallam; matter and
urine were for a considerable time discharged by stool, but from what
cause could not be imagined ; when the individual died, upon an
examination of his body, a stone was found impacted in the ureter ; the
colon and ureter were united by means of the adhesive process, and an
opening, about three quarters of an inch from the kidney, had been
made from the latter into the former, which satisfactorily explained the
origin of the pus and urine evacuated from the intestines before death.

Here is a preparation (showing one to the students) which was taken
from a boy who had been successfully operated upon for stone in this
hospital, by Mr. Cline, sen. ; in a short time subsequent to the opera-
tion, the lad suffered from severe pain in his loins ; this was quickly
followed by rigors, and lastly death ; when his body was examined, a
stone was discovered in the ureter. A woman once came to my house,
complaining of a most lancinating pain in the belly and loins, together
with excessive vomiting. I told her that she was much too ill to be
absent from her house, and advised her instantly to return home and
send for her medical attendant. In company with this gentleman, I
soon afterwards saw her ; at the expiration of three days she died.
When we afterwards examined the body, the instant the surgeon cut
into the abdomen, there issued through the opening a strong urinous
smell ; on prosecuting the examination, we found a stone lodged in one
of the ureters ; this obstructed calculus had given rise to an abscess,
which had burst into the cavity of the abdomen, whence arose the
almost sudden dissolution.

But it every now and then happens, that calculi of the ureters will
escape without proving destructive to life. Mr. Stone, a surgeon in
Sussex, had a carter in his neighbourhood, to whom such a result hap-
pened the man for a long while felt a severe pain in the direction of
the ureter — at length an abscess formed upon the spine of the ilium,
and when it broke there was discharged through the opening this calcu-
lus (showing it to the class). From its figure it is evident that it was
formed in the ureter ; the man ultimately did well.

Now, gentlemen, of the

TREATMENT OF CALCULI IN THE URETER.

During those violent paroxysms of suffering which I have detailed to
you, the patient should be bled to syncope you should give him



298



ON CALCULI IN THE BLADDER.



opium : potass may also be administered with advantage, for I do be-
lieve that it lessens the irritability of the urinary organs, and in this
manner will afford considerable relief ; the person should also be put
into a warm bath, and when in that situation, the surgeon should sit by
his side, and rub the abdomen in the course of the ureter; for the urine
having collected above the stone, and its vis a tergo being insufficient to
push the calculus onward, friction, properly directed, will prove of great
service by its mechanical influence on the accumulated fluid, and it
will be found agreeable to the patient rather than otherwise. Well,
then, the plan to pursue is, to bleed, with a view of preventing inflam-
mation ; to give opium and potass, for the purpose of diminishing pain
and irritability, and mechanically to assist the passage of the stone by
rubbing the surface of the abdomen in the course of the ureter.

CALCULI IN THE BLADDER.

The next situation in which calculi are formed is in the bladder ; and
as much can be done in this complaint by surgical treatment, we shall
dwell more at length on the circumstances attending it, and describe to
you the operation required for removing a stone from the bladder.
Directly a stone enters the bladder, the symptoms change ; there will
be a pain along the urethra, extending from the neck of the bladder
forwards, though this is not always present ; but opposite to the frse-
num, about an inch from the extremity of the penis, there is always
considerable pain : and the patient walks with difficulty, with slight
pain at the end of the yard. Some persons will come into your room,
sit down, and say that they think that they have a stone in the bladder,
and talk lightly of it; but you may depend, gentlemen, that they have
no such thing; the pain felt opposite to the fraenum, in eases of stone
of the bladder, is as if a knife was running through thepenis, and they
will describe it as a deep-seated pain. It is different in degree in many
cases, some being exceedingly irritable, others being much less so — but the
pain is generally very severe. Very little urine can be kept in the blad-
der, and the patient feels a frequent disposition to void it. Pain opposite
to the fraenum, and a frequent disposition to void the urine, arc symptoms
attending stone ; and if there is much irritation, bloody urine will be
voided : indeed this is a constant concomitant, and is a symptom you
should particularly inquire for: it is not always present in the very
young, but in adults, and those who have been afflicted with stone for
a long time, this symptom will be met with. Where persons who have
stone cannot ride on horseback without being obliged frequently to dis-
mount and void the urine — what you find is this, they go a short dis-
tance, then are obliged to stop and get off, and discharge their urine,



ON CALCULI IN THE BLADDER.



299



which is bloody. If they ride in a carriage it is the same ; they are
obliged to stop and get out — and if they are in the company of friends,
and wish to conceal it from them, the desire to void the urine is so
great, that they are obliged to sacrifice their natural delicacy of mind
to the irresistible call of nature. The urine is not changed unless there
is much irritation in the bladder ; but if the stone has been of long
standing, and there is disease in the bladder, there will be clots of
blood in the urine. When the mucous membrane of the bladder is af-
fected, the urine will be white, which will show that the bladder is dis-

I eased ; there will also be flakes of matter in it, and when this is the
case, the patient is in a state that would be improper for an operation,
i There is a sudden arrest of urine during the flow of a full stream, in
consequence either of a valve formed in the urethra, or the stone resting
against the neck of the bladder. The diagnostic symptoms of stone in
the bladder are pain towards the extremity of the penis, opposite to the
frsenum, discharge of bloody urine ; sudden arrest of the water during
H the flow of a full stream, and a frequent disposition to void the urine, and
H pain in doing it, particularly in the erect position. Persons with stone
I are frequently obliged, when they make water, to rest their heads against
I something, to bend their arms and legs, and thus discharge their
I urine. There is a disposition also to void the faeces at the time of
I making water, as the rectum obeys the motion of the bladder. In some
I cases the abdominal muscles are affected with violent spasms. First,
| persons are affected with violent spasms of these muscles — then have
I disease of the mucous membrane of the bladder — and frequent shiver-
I ings. This is so common a symptom occurring with stone in the
I bladder, and is so well known, that it will be unnecessary to dwell on
I it. One curious circumstance, generally observed when there is stone
II in the bladder, is an elongation of the prepuce, particularly in boys.
I This is singular, and not easily explained, unless it is produced by
B pressure on it when the pain at the extremity of the penis comes on ;
■ for as the pain in this part is an exceedingly distressing symptom, and
■ pressure on the nerve deadens it, it is made, and the prepuce thus he-
ft comes elongated by it. Having thus gone over the symptoms of stone,
I we shall now say a few words on the size, number, form, &c. of stones
Ij found in the bladder. Calculi are formed in the bladder around some
*j extraneous body, which gets into it, and which is the nucleus, or about
elofs of blood ; or the stones pass from the kidneys through the ureters,
1 1 and enter the bladder. Some stones are composed of concentric lamellae,
while others are not; in those which are, layer after layer is deposited
■jiiand adheres, but the lamella: are composed of much firmer materials
kthan the bond of adhesion which unites them. The nuclei, around



300



ON CALCULI IN THE BLADDER.



which stones form, are various ; here is one (exhibiting it to the class),
as you see, composed of a needle ; you will say, no doubt, that this
must have been swallowed, and that, passing through the intestines, it
entered the bladder through the rectum. I will tell you how it got
there. A nurse, who had the care of a child, put it to sit on a mat
upon its naked bottom, and it immediately began to cry; when the
nurse, out of humanity, I suppose, took it up, and danced it well in
her arms ; the more the child screamed, the more the nurse danced it.
A few months after this it had symptoms of stone, and it was ascer-
tained that there was one in the bladder. I cut the child, and took
from it this calculus, with a nucleus formed of a needle. The needle
must have penetrated the perineum, or the nates, and by this means
reached the bladder. Here, gentleman, is a slate-pencil forming a
nucleus. I will give you the history of the case. A man came to me,
whilst I was living in the city, and said that he had a slate-pencil in
his bladder ; considering him to be mad, or wishing to impose, or that
it was for the purpose of a quiz, I said very well, and prescribed some-
thing for him, and sent him away. About a fortnight afterwards this
man came again to my house, and said that he had a slate-pencil in
the bladder, and if I thought it a trick, I could examine him ; this I
did ; I passed a sound, and found a stone. I then said, how came the
pencil there ? “ Why, Sir,” he replied, “ I have had a stricture for

some time, and have used bougies a good deal ; but one day, not being
able to pass one, I thought that I would try something that would be
strong enough, and therefore introduced a piece of slate-pencil, which
broke in the passage, and part of it got into the bladder.” 1 told him
that he must submit to an operation, in order to have it removed ; and
being a pauper, I advised him to go to an hospital, where proper care
and attention would be taken of him. He came to Guy’s, where I
operated on him, and took the pencil from the bladder. The stone
which had formed round it is the triple phosphate ; this kind of stone
usually forms where there has existed much irritation in the bladder.
Here is a piece of metallic bougie, or catheter, round which a stone
formed. I will mention here, as I may not have an opportunity again,
that pewter catheters should not be allowed to remain in the urethra
more than a week, as the urine acts on the materials of which they are
composed, makes them brittle, and if left in the urethra beyond the
time I have mentioned, are very apt to break, and then enter the blad-
der. Stones form round them, as in the case from which this specimen
was taken. I have known several examples of this. Here is a curious
specimen of a calculus formed round a piece of tobacco-pipe, which got
into the bladder in rather a curious manner. It was sent to me by Mr.



ON CALCULI IN THE BLADDER.



301



Godwin, surgeon to the Derbyshire Infirmary; the section has fortu-
nately been made through the centre ; one-half Mr. G. kept for himself,
and the other part he was kind enough to send me.

You see that an extraneous body in the bladder forms a nucleus for
a stone. The stone will be composed of the triple phosphate or of uric
acid, according to the degree of irritation which has been kept up ; if
it has been considerable, the stone will contain the triple phosphate.

The next circumstance to which I shall advert is the number of calculi
found in the bladder. I do not think that the patient is in greater danger
in an operation, from a larger number of stones being in the bladder,
or even so much, as when there is only one large or moderate-sized stone.
— The introduction of a pair of forceps into the bladder, for removing
one or more stones, is not dangerous ; but the great danger, gentlemen,
is, if the parts are bruised, and cause of irritation produced. Here are
nine calculi that were taken from one person ; but this is not a great
number. Here are 37. The largest number that I ever took from
one person is 142 ; it was from a gentleman of Worcester ; he survived
the operation, and I operated on him again ; all the calculi consists of
uric acid, or at least those which have been analyzed do, and the others
appear to be composed of the same. It was this case which led me to
say just now, that the introduction of the forceps for removing a stone
is not dangerous ; for at the first operation I introduced the forceps
seventy times, sometimes withdrawing them without a single calculus,
at others with three : after the operation he suffered very little ; for the
introduction of the forceps is not dangerous, but the danger arises from
the bruise of the part, and from the violence used in extracting large
calculi.



SIZE OF CALCULI.

The usual weight of calculi formed in the bladder is from half an
ounce to two ounces ; most frequently under two ounces. The largest
I ever extracted is the one I now show you ; its weight is sixteen ounces.
After I introduced a pair of forceps, I was obliged to send for a gim-
blet, in order to bore it, but it was so firm that I could not. I succeeded,
however, in extracting it by disengaging one blade of the forceps, using
it as in midwifery, and then by bringing the stone under the pubes and
above the os coccygis, I managed so as to remove it. Mr. Mayo, a
surgeon at Winchester, extracted a stone fifteen ounces in weight, but
that was broken. The largest stone that I ever saw extracted without
its being broken, (at the same time the patient surviving,) is one that
was taken from a person at the Norwich Hospital, it weighed eight
ounces. But the weight and size of stones do not bear a relative pro-

D D






302



ON CALCULI IN THE BLADDER.



portion, for some stones of considerable magnitude do not weigh much,
whilst others which are small weigh a good deal. A very large stone,
that was found in a body after death, weighed twenty-five ounces.
There is one at Trinity College, Cambridge, which weighs thirty ounces ;
it is stated to weigh thirty-three ounces, but I believe thirty is the true
weight. The stone of the greatest size and weight I ever heard of,
was one taken from the body of a highly respectable individual, after
death, by two eminent surgeons of this town. He had a paralysis of
the lower extremities, and half of the body was insensible ; in this state
he was operated on for stone, but after various attempts at extracting it,
the operation was postponed for a week, in order that some instrument
might be obtained in the mean while, by which the stone might be
broken. At the end of the week the operation was again repeated, but
the stone was neither to be broken nor extracted, and the gentleman died
from irritation. On examining the body after death, there was found
a large stone in the bladder, which there was a difficulty of raising from
its seat; it could not have been extracted if the high operation had been
performed ; it weighed forty-four ounces, and a slight addition, how
many grains or drachms I am not exactly sure.



LECTURE XXXIX.

1 N the last evening’s lecture, gentlemen, I began to describe to you the
subject of the formation of calculi, the different species of calculi, and
the symptoms which attend them. I shall now proceed with this sub-
ject. The pain which a patient experiences from stone in the bladder
is by no means in proportion to its bulk. It is not exactly in the inverse
ratio to its magnitude, but still it approaches that inverse ratio. When
a stone becomes excessively large, the patient generally loses the power
of retaining his urine, and the distillation of urine from the bladder
prevents that contraction of it which occasions so much pain to the
patient in discharging the last drops of it. Doctor Franklin, the cele-
brated American philosopher, who died of this disease, suffered exces-
sively for a number of years from it, but at last, when the stone acquired
considerable magnitude, he experienced but little pain. The pain does
not so much depend on the form of the stone as on the general irrita-
bility of the patient, and especially on irritability of the bladder. Thus
you will sometimes in performing the operation find a stone excessively
pointed, where the patient complains of but trifling symptoms ; and,
on the other hand, when the stone is perfectly smooth, the patient
suffers extreme pain. The pain, therefore, depends more on the irri-



ON CALCULI IN THE BLADDER.



303



tability of the bladder and the constitution of the patient, than on the
form or surface of the stone ; cateris paribus, however, rough stones
will give the greatest degree of pain.

There are four different kinds of calculi, when chemically examined.
A very nice examination may lead to further discoveries on this subject ;
but at present we are only acquainted with four species. The first is
the uric acid, which is a common, but not the most common form of
calculus. The second is the triple phosphate, or ammoniaco-magnesian
phosphate; the third species is the mulberry, or oxalate of lime, an
excellent specimen of which occurred the other day in the boy at the
other hospital. The other species was lately discovered by Dr. Wollaston,
a most admirable chemist, and one of the first philosophers of the age,
who developes every subject to which he applies his active and powerful
mind, with an extraordinary degree of minuteness and accuracy. In
examining the different calculi, he discovered the species which I am
now mentioning, to which he gave the name of the cystic oxide. With
respect to the uric acid, it is distinguished by concentric lamella?, and
when cut has the colour and appearance of wood. (The learned pro-
fessor exhibited a specimen to the class.) It is soluble in alkalis, and
alkaline medicines are therefore commonly recommended for this kind
of stone.

The second species is composed of triple phosphate, or ammoniaco-
magnesian phosphate. It is of a greyish white colour, and not so dis-
tinctly laminated as the uric acid. It is not soluble in alkalis, but it is
acted upon by the acids ; on the application of the blow -pipe it becomes
vitrified. It is acted upon by the acids, but not in any considerable
degree. A quantity of matter resembling mortar, which is, in fact, the
ammoniaco-magnesian phosphate, is generally passed from the bladder,
and the urine is highly offensive. I mention particularly these ap-
pearances, because this stone is constantly liable to be reproduced after
the operation is performed, which is not the case with the uric acid
stone. I will mention a case, which made a strong impression on me
in earlier life, showing the readiness with which the triple phosphate is
reproduced. A gentleman came to me from Southampton with stone
in his bladder. I operated upon him, and removed a triple phosphate
calculus. He came to me again twelve months after, with symptoms
of stone. I sounded him, and distinctly felt a stone ; a consultation was
had upon his case, and it was deemed advisable that the operation
should not be performed. He went back to Southampton, where, after
suffering extremely from the stone, he had it removed from the bladder,
by Mr. Lightford, of Manchester. The stone was of such magnitude



304



ON CALCULI IN THE BLADDER.



that it was at first supposed that I had removed one stone, and left
another in the bladder. A little time after the second operation, how.
ever, he began again to complain of symptoms of stone ; he died a few
months after, and upon examination after death, three calculi, as far as
I recollect, were found in his bladder. When I perceive the appear-
ances which I have described to you, namely, the substance resembling
mortar, which is in fact the ammoniaco-magnesian phosphate, I gene-
rally dissuade the patient from submitting to the operation. Another
case, illustrating the rapid reproduction of the triple phosphate, strikes
my mind at this moment. I removed a stone of this kind from a gen-
tleman who came to me from Liverpool. A short time after he began
to complain of symptoms of stone, and upon sounding him I felt the
instrument moving in a quantity of calculous concretions. He suffered
extremely from this second formation of calculus, and requested him-
self that the operation might be again performed. I performed the
operation, and removed a quantity of triple phosphate mixed with a
large portion of coagulated blood. He recovered also from this ope-
ration, but before he left town to return to Liverpool the same material
formed again in his bladder : I introduced a pair of forceps for the
extraction of small calculi, and extracted eight portions of triple phos-
phate from his bladder. Whenever you observe the symptoms of triple
phosphate calculus, be upon your guard against performing the ope-
ration, until you have corrected the disposition to its reproduction in the
manner which I shall point out to you when I come to speak of the
medical treatment applicable to calculous affections. The mulberry
calculus, which consists of oxalate of lime, is, to a certain degree,
soluble in the acids ; it will be proper, therefore, to give in these cases
muriatic or sulphuric acid; the muriatic acid is generally preferred.
The cystic oxyde has the appearance of brown sugar in a state of crys-
tallization ; it is not composed of concentric lamellse. A stone from
the kidneys has been analyzed by Dr. Marcet, and found to be of this
species, but the opinion once entertained, that it is formed in the
bladder itself, is not correct. Mr. Brande has analyzed 150 calculi, in
order to ascertain the relative portion of materials in each species. The
Tesult of this analysis, as far as my memory bears me out, was as
follows : — of the 150 calculi, sixteen were uric acid. This led me
to remark, that uric acid were not the most common ; they occur in
the proportion of sixteen in 150. Forty-five were composed of uric
acid in considerable quantity, with triple phosphate in a smaller pro-
portion ; uric acid plus, and triple phosphate minus. Sixty-three were
composed of triple phosphate in a larger, and uric acid in a smaller



ON CALCULI IN THE BLADDER.



305



proportion ; triple phosphate plus, and uric acid minus. Twelve were
entirely triple phosphates ; five were composed of uric acid with a
nucleus of the phosphate of lime, and six were mulberry calculi.

The analysis stands thus : —

Of 150 calculi
16 ... . were uric acid

45 ... . uric acid plus , triple phosphate minus

66 . . . . triple phosphate plus, uric acid minus

12 ... . triple phosphate

b ... . uric acid with a nucleus of phosphate of lime

6 . . . . mulberry calculi

150

With respect to the medical treatment of calculi, when a person says
to me, “ I think I can dissolve a stone by some chemical menstruum,”
my features, which are more disposed to the risible than the solemn, are
apt to give way ; I generally smile. The menstrua employed for the
purpose of dissolving stones in the bladder, undergo so much alteration
before they reach the cavity of the bladder, that they can have very
little influence on a stone which is already formed. Nay, I can tell you
more, if those very menstrua be injected directly on the surface of a
stone existing in the bladder, the stone will still remain undissolved. I
witnessed an admirable case in the other hospital, which was kept for a
length of time under a dresser of mine, who was very chemically dis-
posed, and who thought he could dissolve the stone by the injection of
the menstrua best adapted for that purpose. He did so for a long time,
and taught the man to inject these menstrua into the bladder himself. I
used, in going through the wards, to say to this man, “ Well, are you
any better ? ” The man shook his head. After a time, however, on
my repeating this question, he replied, “ Yes, Sir, I am better.”
“ Oh, you are,” said I, “ how does that happen ? ” “ Why, Sir,”

said the man, “ I have learnt to inject opium into my bladder, and
this gives me great relief, though I cannot say that any thing I pre-
viously tried did me any good.” The opium tranquillized him at first,
but after a time it lost its influence, and this man died of an ulcerated
bladder. The whole internal surface of the bladder was ulcerated, and
covered with stalactites of triple phosphate. So much for injecting
menstrua into the bladder with a view of dissolving the stone : still less
influence can those menstrua have on the stone when taken internally,
and altered as they must be when carried through the circulation, and
passing through the process of secretion before they reach the bladder.
But though medicines cannot dissolve the stone, they will do good by

D D 2



306



ON CALCULI IN THE BLADDER.



diminishing the irritability of the bladder. This is strongly illustrated
by the following case : — Some years ago I happened to be in Norfolk,
at a public breakfast, when I asked the lady of a naval officer, how it
happened that the admiral was not there ? She informed me that he was
very ill, and wished me to call upon him. I found him lying on his
sofa, suffering under the symptoms of stone, and upon introducing a
sound, I chipped off a portion of calculus, which he passed a short time
after. I sent the calculus to Dr. Marcet, who, upon analyzing it, found
it to be of the mulberry kind, that is, oxalate of lime, and accordingly
advised me to order the patient muriatic acid. I was happy to take
the advice of Dr. Marcet, upon whose judgment I had the fullest re-
liance ; but the patient derived no benefit from the muriatic acid, and I
therefore advised him to take a drachm of the subcarbonate of soda four
times a day. A considerable time after, on going to a consultation on
the case of the Duke of Portland, at which Sir Everard Home, and Dr.
Reynolds were present, Dr. Reynolds said tome, “ So you have cured
Admiral of his stone.” I smiled, and observed that I had re-

moved a good many stones, but that I had never cured any body of

that disease. “ Why,” said Dr. Reynolds, “ Admiral tells

me, that since he has taken a medicine you recommended to him, he
has been so well, that he has been able to go down to a Court Martial ;
‘ and if,’ added the Admiral, ‘ you can find me a pretty girl, Doctor

, why, I could dance down five-and-twenty couple with her.

{Much laughter). « I have continued,’ said the Admiral, ‘ to take a
drachm of subcarbonate of soda four times a day ; though the stone
falls over the neck of the bladder, I no longer feel any pain, and if you
were to ask me now to submit to the operation, I would snap my fingers
at you.’ ” It appears, therefore, that though medicines cannot dissolve
the stone, they may lessen the irritability of the bladder, and greatly
mitigate the sufferings of the patient. The soda diminishes the stimu-
lating influence of the urine ; it may also coat the surface of the stone ;
if it do, so much the better.

The following case affords a remarkable instance of the influence of
the acids in altering the character of calculi, by acting on the surface,
and diminishing irritability. A gentleman from Birmingham consulted
Dr. Baillie and myself, on account of his passing a large quantity ot
triple phosphate with his urine. He was recommended to take muriatic
acid, and three days after he had taken it, the triple phosphate had en-
tirely disappeared, but the uric acid was substituted for it, in as large
quantities as the triple phosphate. As long as he continued to take the
muriatic acid, he made uric acid ; but when he left it off, the triple
phosphate was re-produced ; but whether he made the triple phosphate



OPERATION OF LITHOTOMY.



307



or uric acid, there was no diminution of the secretion from the kidneys
in point of quantity. The acids, therefore, will alter the character of
the calculus, by acting upon its surface, and diminishing irritability ;
but they have no power of dissolving the stone in the bladder. This
gentleman was relieved from the calculous secretion from the kid-
neys, by attention to his general health, and not by any medicines given
with a view to the calculus. The liquor potass® conjoined with opium
has considerable effect in diminishing irritability; and it should be
given for some time before the operation for stone. This medicine has
a very beneficial effect on children who have stone in the bladder, and
pass a large quantity of matter ; it will remove this excessive secretion,
and enable you afterwards to perform the operation with success.

Some little benefit may therefore be derived from medical treatment,
by lessening the irritability of the bladder and constitution, but the
stone will remain, and surgery alone will be the only effectual means by
which the sufferings of the patient can be removed.

OPERATION OF LITHOTOMY.

We shall now proceed to speak of the operation for stone, of the
lateral operation, together with the high operation, and shall also show
you a forceps for removing calculi from the bladder, when they are
small, without having 'recourse to any cutting operation. And first I
shall describe the lateral operation ; 1 shall not perform it this evening,
for I don’t know whether there is a subject or not, but I shall state to
you the circumstances to be attended to before the operation, give you
a description of the instruments required, and perform the operation on
the next evening.

The first circumstance to consider before you operate for lithotomy, is
whether the constitution of the patient is in a sound state, or his general
health good. He who practises surgery must know that if an operation
were performed as soon as the symptoms of stone arise, without first in-
quiring into the state of the patient’s constitution, the surgeon would
lose a great number of his patients, and soon injure hiS character ;
there is no operation in which an attention to the constitution is more
necessary before it is performed than that for the stone. The person should
be in good general health at the time, for unless he is, there will be little
chance of success. Those who have been exposed to the vicissitudes of
life and to poverty, and have been obliged to labour for their bread,
generally bear the operation for stone well, and in those persons the
chance of success is considerably greater than in the higher ranks of
society, and those you generally meet with in private practice. Let any
man be honest, and he must acknowledge that in hospital practice, there



308



OPERATION OF LITHOTOMY.

is infinitely more success than in private practice ; for those who have
been reared in the lap of luxury, and have drunk freely, if submitted to
an operation for stone, frequently die from it. Therefore, with respect
to the higher orders of society, unless a surgeon previously study the
constitution, and require his patients to live differently from what they
have been accustomed, he will injure his reputation, and lose his pa-
tients. Great advantage will be derived from putting a patient, who is
to be operated on for stone, on vegetable food, a short time beforehand ;
it is not right that he should be on full, or animal diet. It is also im-
proper to operate on a patient as soon as he is admitted into the hos-
pital ; the surgeon should wait, and have the patient prepared by giving
him vegetable food, and also sounding him frequently ; the introduction
of the sound accustoms the bladder to irritation, and when it has been
done pretty often before the operation is performed, the patient bears it
infinitely better than when he has been operated on without it. You
should also inquire whether there is any local disease of any organ ; the
kidneys sometimes becomes altered, when there is stone in the bladder.
A man came to Guy’s hospital having a stone in his bladder. I sounded
him, but there was matter on the sound when I withdrew it ; I said to
the gentlemen present, that the man would not bear the operation, and
on that account postponed it. In three weeks after this man died, and
on examining the body, the two kidneys were found in opposite states ;
one was one-third or one-fourth smaller than natural, and the other was
double its original size ; they are both preserved in the museum over
the way. The patient would have died, if I had performed the opera-
tion on him, from the disease of the kidneys, and then I should have
had the discredit of killing him. If the bladder is ulcerated do not per-
form the operation-on any account, for it will not be successful. But
especially never submit a patient to the operation for stone, if there be
the slightest affection of the chest — the least difficulty of breathing — any
signs of asthma, or any irregularity of circulation. No person who has
any regard for the safety of his patient, or his own reputation as a sur-
geon, will ever operate for stone, unless the chest be free from all
complaint. You hear of one surgeon being exceedingly successful in
the operation for stone, and of another less so. The cause of it is this,
the one is careful to select his cases : he puts aside all those who have
any other affection, and tells them to wait, and only submits those to
the operation who are free from any other disease. This is judgment,
and it is right : unless the patient is suffering exceedingly from the
stone, you should not operate until he is free from every other com-
plaint.

As to the age at which the operation may be performed. — Some say,



OPERATION OF LITHOTOMY.



309



when a man advanced in years has a stone, that he is too old to undergo
an operation, and the patient himself often says that he is too old ; but
this is not the case, and age is not an objection to its being performed.
The time of life which is best fitted for this operation is about sixty-one
or sixty-two, and at this period a great number of cases occur. After
the age of twenty the danger of the operation increases, but between sixty
and sixty -three more cases recover than at any other period ; at least
this is what I have seen. If a patient is loaded with fat, there is always
danger from peritoneal inflammation. As to advanced age, Mr. Cline,
sen., has operated on a patient eighty-two years of age ; Mr. Attenbur-
row, of Nottingham, has operated on a person of eighty-six. I have
operated on a patient of seventy-six, but never on one older ; this pa-
tient lived twelve years afterwards, and died at the age of eighty-eight ;
therefore, old age is not an objection to the operation, unless there is an
enlargement of the prostate, when you must not operate. With respect
to die very young, they are in considerable danger from die operation.
I mean children before they are four years old. After four they acquire
strength, and the irritability of the constitution is much lessened ;
under this age convulsions frequently come on after the operation ;
and in three days the children often die, more especially if they have
lost much blood at the time of the operation. I have operated on a
child of one year and nine months, and it has recovered ; but very often
indeed do convulsions come on after the operation for stone in the very
young, which in most cases terminate existence. With regard to the
success of the stone operation, it is quite certain, if the accounts pub-
lished be correct, that the success lately has not been so great as it used
to be. Of Cheselden’s operations, if I recollect aright, only four in
fifty-six failed. Mr. Martineau, of Norwich, has operated for stone
with most extraordinary success. He has published a paper in the
Medico-CItirurgical Transactions , which is well deserving your atten-
tion ; no surgeon in London, I am certain, can boast of similar success.
The degree of success which is considered the most correct, is that taken
from the result of the cases at the Norfolk and Norwich hospital. When
I was there, there were between two and three hundred cases registered ;
all the calculi were preserved, together with an account of the different
operations performed for the removal of each, and I then took an op-
portunity of ascertaining what was the result of these cases. Since that
time a more detailed account has been given by the late Dr. Marcet, in
his work on calculi, from which it appears that hoo in fifteen died.

\\ ell, gentlemen, this is the result of the practice of the Norwich and
Norfolk hospital. Although I stated to you just now the result of the
practice of two individuals (Cheselden and Mr. Martineau), take care



310 INSTRUMENTS USED IN LITHOTOMY.



how you draw any deduction from particular cases. I, and many others
also, have, for a length of time, met with extraordinary success in
operating for the stone, when four or five unsuccessful cases in succes-
sion have come, which have generally brought the result to the amount
I mentioned, viz., that two out of fifteen die. I should say, when it is
stated that one in twelve only died formerly, what operator now is more
successful than this with the greatest care, even with a selection of his
cases, and with very extensive experience? Patients should I10 t
be sent away from the hospitals before they are quite well, for if
they are, and they die, then the death of the patient is attributed to
the operation.



INSTRUMENTS USED IN LITHOTOMY.

What you require for the operation is a table, about two feet six
inches high, and bandages to fasten the hands to the feet, and to draw
the knees towards the body ; you should give the patient an injection
the day before the operation, and the rectum should be completely
emptied, otherwise it will be in danger of being opened in the
operation.

The first instrument that it will be necessary to consider is the sound;
this should be of a large size. The sound, however, should be fitted
to the size of the urethra ; for if a small sound be used in a large urethra,
or a large sound in a small one, the stone will very often escape being
felt. You should sound the bladder, both when it is full and when
empty. When a person comes to me with symptoms of stone, I order
him to lie on some chairs, and sound him ; but if I cannot discover a
stone, I then ask him how long it is since he had made water ; if he
says an hour or two, I direct him to void his uriue ; and it has fre-
quently happened that I have felt a stone as the water was discharging,
when I had not been able to do it before. In these cases I use a
catheter, putting my finger over the orifice, and moving the instrument
across the bladder ; if the stone is not to be felt, I take away my finger,
and then it frequently happens that, as the urine escapes, the stone
strikes against it. Now, gentlemen, if a person says that a stone may
be readily felt when it is in the bladder, I would ask any surgeon,
who has had the least experience, to confess honestly whether he has
not sounded a patient for stone, and has been unable to find one, when
another surgeon has detected it in a moment. It happened to myself

it happens to all. A patient came to me who had been sounded twice

by as good a mechanical surgeon as any I know in London (though,
by the by, a mechanical surgeon is only half a surgeon), and the stone
had escaped his observation, yet, on introducing the sound, I imme-



OPERATION OF LITHOTOMY.



311



diateiy felt it. If there is an enlargement of the prostate, the point of
the sound frequently strikes against it, or passes over it, and in those
cases the stone commonly escapes being felt.

The next instrument required is the staff, and this should be as large
as the patient can admit ; let the groove be large and deep, which will
lessen the danger of the knife or gorget slipping in its passage to the
bladder : the larger the groove, the safer it will be. The staff should
be a little more curved than the sound, and it will then serve as a di-
rector for the knife : for if it is not, you will be obliged to lower the
instrument you are going to introduce, in order that it may reach the
bladder. When you are about to cut a patient for stone, let the staff
rest on the stone, and I will tell you why : I have seen too many instances
where the gorget has not entered the bladder, and this has arisen from
the staff not being in the bladder, but resting on the prostate, by which
means the gorget has slipped, and passed between the bladder and rec-
tum. The staff should be held perpendicularly, and should rest on
the stone ; then, when the gorget is introduced into the groove, it goes
to the stone, and the forceps may be passed directly to the spot where
it is. I again repeat, never let the staff rest on the prostate gland, but
on the stone.

LECTURE XL.

OPERATION OF LITHOTOMY.

I began, gentlemen, towards the conclusion of the last lecture, to
describe to you the instruments required to perform the operation of
lithotomy. I stated to you the manner in which the bladder should be
sounded, both as regarded its full and empty state, and that a stone
could often be detected in one of those conditions when not in the other.

1 told you not to use too large or too small a sound, and explained
the reasons for such instruction. In alluding to the staff, 1 particularly
advised you to employ one having a deep groove, whereby the danger
of the knife or gorget slipping is materially guarded against. You
were likewise instructed, when performing the operation of lithotomy,
to let the staff rest on the stone. I have several times known where this
maxim had not been attended to, that the gorget has not entered the
bladder, and it arose from the circumstance of the staff having been
permitted to rest on the prostate gland.

W hen you sound a man for a stone, I would advise you to be on your
guard as to any queries respecting what you have discovered. Let your
answers be rather equivocal and evasive than otherwise, for by a decisive



312



OPERATION OF LITHOTOMY.



answer either in the affirmative or negative, your reputation may receive
unmerited injury. The reason why you should be thus cautious, after
what I stated to you in my last, must be sufficiently obvious, viz., from
the well-known fact that a calculus may be detected by the sound at one
time, and not at another ; so that if, after an examination, you were
positively to tell a person that he had not a stone in his bladder, and upon
being sounded the following day by another surgeon he was as positively
assured to the contrary, if it should prove in the sequel that you were
wrong, the patient would lose all confidence in you, entertain opinions
unfavourable to your professional talents, and report you to his friends
accordingly. Be therefore on your guard.

In the lateral operation of lithotomy, you are to begin your incision
a little on the left side of the raphe, immediately below the symphysis
pubis, and carry it obliquely downwards and outwards to midway be-
tween the anus and tuberosity of the ischium, and the termination of
the incision should be opposite the centre of the anus. Before you com-
mence the incision, you should draw aside the raphe towards the ramus
of the ischium on the right side. Never begin an operation without
having first reflected well on what you are going to do ; and in making
incisions through the skin, you should, before you apply the knife,
mark out with your eye the course which such incisions should take,
and the precise point where they should terminate. Well then, the
first cut through the skin, made in the direction just mentioned, pene-
trates the skin and cellular substance, and lays bare the accelerator
urinse ; you then with the fingers of your left hand push or draw the
bulb of the penis under the ramus of the ischium on the right side, so
that the next incision will pass between the bulb and crus penis of the
left side ; there is no necessity in reality for cutting the bulb, and it
should therefore be avoided ; well, carrying your knife forward between
the bulb and crus, you divide the accelerator urinse, and this you
should do completely, for if you permit any portion of its fibres to
remain undivided, particularly at the upper part, if the stone should be
at all large, you would find that their contractions would very much
increase the difficulty of withdrawing the stone ; as soon as the accele-
rator urinse has been cut through, you expose the transverse perinei ;
you are then to feel for the groove of the staff with the nail of the index
finger of the left hand, and having fully satisfied yourself of its situa-
tion, you are to cut into it through the membranous part of the urethra
by means of the same scalpel with which you made the other incisions ;
and then, fixing the beak of the gorget in the groove of the staff, you
are to bring down towards you the handle of the latter instrument, while
at the same moment you push the gorget into the bladder, with its point



OPERATION OF LITHOTOMY.



313



directed upwards, and its handle of course somewhat depressed. I give
you this last direction for the purpose of preventing the dreadful acci-
dent of the gorget slipping and passing between the bladder and rectum,
instead of its entering the former viscus ; I shall say more of this un-
fortunate occurrence presently, and will now proceed to describe the
gorget and knife.

Gorget.— The gorget, which was first employed in the operation of
lithotomy, had no cutting edge, (here the learned professor exhibited
it to the students, as he likewise did every instrument which he de-
scribed in the course of the lecture,) as you perceive, and this instru-
ment has one very great advantage over the cutting gorget, viz. its use
does not endanger the life of the patient from hemorrhage, which, cer-
tainly, is a most important consideration ; for no man who has prac-
tised much can say, if he speak honestly and truly, that persons do not
sometimees die of bleeding after the operation of lithotomy. When the
cutting gorget, as it sometimes does, divides the internal pudendal
artery, if that misfortune be not attended to^ the life of the patient be-
comes endangered from the chance of excessive hemorrhage. The blunt
gorget had, however, a counteracting disadvantage of so much conse-
quence, that its employment has been long since relinquished ; it was
the impossibility of making an opening sufficiently large for the removal
of a stone of even inconsiderable magnitude. Cheselden, whose suc-
cess was so great, was in the habit of cutting into the bladder with a
knife. In consequence of the very great reputation which Mr. Mar-
tineau, of Norwich, has acquired for his lithotomy operations, I wrote
to him, and requested the favour of a description of his instruments ;
in the account, however, which he was so kind as to send me, it did
not appear that they differed from those in common practice. Depend
upon it, gentlemen, that little deviations in instruments are over-rated
and over-valued. The success of surgical operations arises rather from
the manner in which the operations are conducted, than from any in-
significant peculiarity which the instrument may possess. Those sur-
geons who are ever constructing new instruments and altering old ones,
you may rely upon it, are deficient here (the learned lecturer touohed
his forehead) — [a laugh] ; such individuals appear rather to be surgical
instrument makers than scientific surgeons ; and in their ridiculous in-
ventions betray a littleness of mind, which proves them to be totally

incapable of achieving any thing that is important any thing that

can add to our store of useful knowledge. The less complicated your
instruments are, and the fewer you employ, so much the better ; your
. operations will be executed with greater ease and expertness, and will
prove much more successful in their issue.



IS E



3J4



OPERATION OF LITHOTOMY.



Sir Caesar Hawkins added to the blunt gorget its cutting edge ; this
was certainly an improvement ; but if the instrument be too wide at
the part where the prostate and bladder are divided, the internal
pudendal artery will be in great danger of being divided, and this is an
accident which you cannot too sedulously avoid.

The gorget that 1 am in the habit of using has its cutting edge con-
tinued only part of the way back, in consequence of which, I know the
exact size of the opening that is made into the bladder, and it is an
effectual safeguard against wounding the above artery. In using
the gorget, great attention should be observed to prevent its slipping
between the bladder and rectum ; it is a most horrible accident, and
most horrible in its consequences. In mentioning cases, gentlemen, in
this theatre, I wish you distinctly to understand, that I never refer my
remarks to any particular case, unless I especially direct your atten-
tion to it, when my meaning cannot, of course, be misinterpreted. I
am induced to make these observations at the present moment from a
feeling that, by possibility, my words may be misapplied, and that,
while alluding to the unfortunate occurrence of the gorget slipping be-
tween the bladder and rectum, that you may have imagined 1 was direct-
ing your notice towards the late unfortunate operation at Guy’s, where
the prostate was so enlarged that the stone could not be removed, and
where it was supposed at the time that the gorget had not entered the
bladder. The gentleman who performed that operation was ever most
anxious to discharge his duty with ardour and with zeal ; his honourable
conduct and gentlemanly deportment caused him to be sincerely esteemed
and respected by his colleagues, and his resignation, from ill-health,
to be deeply regretted by his brother surgeons.

If I were to be asked how many times I had known the accident of
the gorget’s slipping and passing between the bladder and rectum hap-
pen, I should say at least a dozen, and in each case the most lament-
able and fatal consequences ensued ; for the operator lays hold of the
stone, bladder, and all — the forceps slip ; he lays hold of the stone
again enclosed in the bladder, in the same manner, and thus continues
to pull, bruise, and draw the bladder, till at length the patient is carried
back to his bed without the extraction of the stone. Violent inflam-
mation supervenes, from the violent bruising which the bladder receives ^
and in a few days the person is no more.

This untoward circumstance may be easily avoided, if you will be
always sufficiently guarded to cut with your knife into the groove of the
staff, then put your index finger nail into the groove, and keep it there
until you feel its situation occupied by the beak of the gorget ; be sure
not to withdraw your finger until you are satisfied of this fact. Well,



OPERATION OF LITHOTOMY.



315



having placed the beak of the gorget in the groove, take hold of the
handle of the staff in your left hand, and bring it towards you ; at the
same time depress the staff so as to keep it decidedly within the bladder ;
when you bring forward and depress the handle of the staff, that is the
moment for thrusting in the gorget, and this should be done in a direc-
tion upwards. Having satisfied yourselves that the gorget is in the
bladder, withdraw the staff, and then along the hollow of the gorget in-
troduce the forceps ; be particularly cautious when you are introducing
the forceps not to let the gorget recede, and so get out of the bladder ;
this frequently happens, and I will presently tell in what manner : it
is a very awkward accident, and often leads to a great deal of difficulty
in completing the latter part of the operation. 1 will now explain the
mode in which it takes place. When the gorget is in the bladder, and
you attempt to pass the forceps along its concave surface, their point
becomes opposed by the prostate gland, and in using a little requisite
force to get them into the bladder, if you are not very careful the gorget
will be withdrawn ; the forceps, consequently, will not enter the bladder,
and the stone, together with the bladder, will be embraced by the
blades of the forceps in the distressing manner just now explained to you.

If, upon introducing the gorget, considerable hemorrhage should
arise, after the stone has been extracted, it may be checked, and entirely
stopped, by keeping the patient cool, and by plugging the wound with
sponge or lint: while there is any bleeding it would be highly impolitic
to place the person in a warm bed, as the increased temperature would
necessarily augment the disposition to hemorrhage. Do not apply liga-
tures to the vessels on account of these bleedings, as they often, under
such circumstances, give rise to sloughings ; you should not quit the
patient until the flow of blood has ceased. If, therefore, you treat
these bleedings properly in the manner now described to you, they will
not be attended with danger to life from loss of blood, as the hemor-
rhage can be easily checked by keeping the body cool, and by intro-
ducing into the wound a quantity of lint or sponge.

Well, the gorget having been pushed into the bladder, the next step
will be to pass in the forceps : in doing this remember what I told you
a few minutes since respecting the resistance of the prostate and the
occasional escape of the gorget from the bladder before the forceps are
in its cavity. Before withdrawing the gorget you should strike the
stone with the forceps, which act will dispel all doubt as to their not
having entered the bladder.

Forceps . — The ordinary lithotomy forceps have their bend, or joint,
two -thirds of their way forward. If the stone should break, you are
then to use flat forceps. If it be a soft stone, or a number of small



316



OPERATION OF LITHOTOMY.



ones, you may employ the scoop or crotchet. Having passed in this
last instrument, and carried its point a little beyond the stone, you then
pass in your finger to the farthest extremity of the instrument ; the
stone is then lodged between the point of the crotchet and your finger
in the same way as it would have been between the blades of the forceps,
had they been used. Well, so much for the operation of lithotomy, as
performed with the gorget. Now then for that by the knife.

I do not like this instrument for the operation so well as I do the
gorget, and I shall presently tell you why.

Another instrument for dividing the prostate and bladder has of late
been used with success, in the lateral operation of lithotomy, it is called
the bistourie cachee ; it was invented by Cosme, a French surgeon,
about one hundred years since ; it consists of a knife, enclosed in a
sheath, which, after being introduced into the bladder, and, turned with
its edge downwards and outwards, cuts its way out when withdrawn.

I was myself for some years in the habit of using a straight scalpel,
the same kind of instrument as you have lately seen Mr. Tyrrell
operate with in this hospital. Mr. Thomas Blizard is said to have
improved this instrument by making its blade longer and more narrow ;
it may be an alteration for the better, for aught I know to the contrary,
for I am never so wedded to any thing of my own as not to be fully
aware that other people’s productions may be far superior.

Now, that young people may be readily and successfully cut with a
knife, I can fully testify ; for, without vanity, I may say that my ex-
perience in the operation has been considerable : I have myself cut
twenty-four individuals for the stone in the course of one year, partly
in private, and partly in hospital practice ; have used both the knife and
gorget pretty extensively ; and I should hold myself exceedingly cul-
pable if 1 did not fairly and candidly communicate to you the unalloyed
opinions which I now entertain. AY ell then, gentlemen, I can tell you
that the knife may be advantageously employed in children — in fact,
you may cut a child with any thing, but not so old persons, in whom
the prostate and bladder are often diseased, and all the parts extremely
rigid : thus, upon such a prostate and bladder the knife makes scarcely
any impression, and the opening through the prostate is exceedingly
small ; while, on the contrary, the external wound will be of conside-
rable size, which may be accounted for from the obvious fact, that the
force is greater near to the hand than at the point of the instrument,
which is much farther from the moving power ; you will consequently
find, when you are performing theoperation of lithotomy with the knife
in old persons having diseased prostate and rigid bladder, that you will
not be enabled to make an opening sufficient to admit of the calculus



OPERATION OF LITHOTOMY.



317



being extracted with that freedom which every scientific surgeon knows
to be prudent. The danger in the operation consists in bruising the
parts, and not in cutting them. Again, in deep perinei, when operating
with the knife, you often think that the instrument has completely
entered the bladder, when, probably, its point has scarcely reached
the verumontanum : you are at a loss — are quite at sea — and cannot
tell whether it has entered the bladder or not.

Well, gentlemen, the result of my experience has convinced me that,
in old persons, the knife is not so good an instrument as either the
gorget or the bistourie cachee ; but in young people it may be used
with perfect safety. I speak from what I have observed, and therefore
speak confidently. I relinquished the use of the knife in the adult and
old persons, because it did not succeed ; and I feel perfectly satisfied,
if at the commencement of your career you should indiscriminately
employ it, that in the end, like me, you will discontinue its use in
grown persons, and adopt it only in operations for children.

DIFFICULTIES IN THE OPERATION.

A large calculus is a most serious obstacle to both the performance
3nd success of lithotomy ; it is a difficulty of a horrible nature ; and
in consequence of the bruise which the neck of the bladder receives
from the force necessary to be employed in its removal, generally
proves mortal. There is no comparison in the danger arising from a
number of small stones, compared with one large one: the small stones,
if you are careful, can all be removed without doing any violence to
the parts ; but with a large one this is impossible.

Large stones, when connected with enlarged prostates, present diffi-
culties much greater than when the gland is in a healthy condition.
Here (handing the specimen to a student) is a preparation in which you
have an opportunity of seeing the state of the parts under these cir-
cumstances. Operations on such patients are dangerous to the last
degree ; it is scarcely possible that they can recover from them ; and
the surgeon often falls into disrepute, most undeservedly, who happens
to have the misfortune to meet with such cases. Some practitioners
tell you that these cases would be successful if they were properly
treated. These men are either fools or impostors, and the sooner they
are kicked out of the profession the better. Such men pretend to
uniform success, which claim, which pretension, to practitioners of
experience and to men of honour, is only an exposure of their want of
candour, and utter disregard of truth. I can assure you, gentlemen,
that you will be sometimes successful, and sometimes not ; only take
care to study your profession with assiduity — to discharge its duties
with fidelity the taunts of your enemies will not then annoy you, and

E E 2



318



OPERATION OF LITHOTOMY.



your minds will then be free from self-reproach. That which I teach
you I know to be really true ; I am no speculator ; my arguments are
the superstructure of facts ; my deductions are from cases and occur-
rences which I have myself observed. In the faithful discharge of my
duty in this theatre I am compelled to mention unfortunate as well as
fortunate cases. I sometimes praise and sometimes censure ; but in
neither do I ever exceed that boundary which would be incompatible
with my own honour or your improvement. In detailing to you the
errors into which surgeons have fallen, I execute a very unpleasant
task — a task much more disagreeable now, from the publicity which my
lectures receive than at any former period ; but, as your pilot, it is my
imperative obligation to warn you against those shoals and rocks which
have foundered but too many of your predecessors. He who publishes
the lectures, however, cannot be too particular in his discretion with re-
gard to publishing names, when those names are blended, as they some-
times are, with unfortunate cases.

I shall now proceed to show you the lateral operation, as performed
with the gorget and knife, and will also show you the high operation
above the pubes, as lately performed at St. George’s Hospital. (A sub-
ject was now brought forward, and the legs having been placed in the
proper position, the learned lecturer said,) Now then for the lateral
mode ; I will perform it first with the knife, and then with the gorget.
(The lecturer now went through both operations according to the detail
given in the course of this lecture ; he demonstrated most carefully
each part to the students as he proceeded, and thus addressed them.)
The staff 1 now resting on the stone, I begin by making an incision in the
left side of the perinseum, commencing at the symphysis pubis, and
carrying it downwards and outwards to midway between the anus and
tuberosity of the ischium, the termination of the incision being, as you
observe, opposite to the centre of the anus; this cut, having passed
through the skin and fat, has exposed the accelerator urina;. I now
divide that muscle between the bulb of the penis and left crus ; and
then with my fingers press the bulbunder the right ramus of the ischium,
to prevent its being wounded. I now divide the transversus perinaei,
and feel with the left index finger for the groove of the staff. I now cut
into the groove at the membranous part of the urethra, and bringing down
the handle of the staff", I push the knife forward into the bladder, and
-then cut through the prostate gland, and the neck of the urinary organ
downwards and outwards, corresponding to the external wound. I
again pass my finger into the wound, and feel for the groove of the staff ;
this instrument mustnow be withdrawn. I keep my finger in the blad-
der, and pass in the forceps with their flat side next to it ; having with
the forceps carefully felt for, and satisfied myself of, the situation of the



319



OPERATION OF LITHOTOMY.

calculus, I grasp it within the blades, and thus withdraw it. All the first
part of the operation with the gorget is the same as that with the knife ;
the staff being introduced, and the opening into the groove through the
membranous part of the urethra having been completed, as you see it, I
fix the beak of the gorget in the groove, and bringing the handle of the staff
towards me I at the same moment push the gorget into the bladder with its
point directed with a considerable inclination upwards^ the staff is then
withdrawn, and the forceps being passed into the bladder, along thehollow
of the gorget, you remove tile latter instrument, and extract the stone as
before.

THE HIGH OPERATION, AS USED IN FRANCE, AND NOW OCCA-
SIONALLY ADOPTED IN ST. GEORGE’S HOSPITAL.

The instruments employed in this operation are a probe-pointed
bistoury, the sonde-a-dard, (a sound containing within it a dart or
stilet,) and a pair of forceps similar to those I have just been using.
Sir Everard Home has attached a net to one side of the forceps, as you
here see it, so that when they are introduced into the bladder, you are
to fish for the stone.

Well, I now pass into the bladder this sonde-a-dard , and by de-
pressing the handle, endeavour to make its point project just above the
symphysis pubis, in a line with it, and the linea alba — I now force on
the stilet, and in this situation it makes its appearance. An incision
must now be made about two inches in length in the direction of the
linea alba, through the integuments down to the bladder, which is sup-
ported against the part by the point of the sound f and then, with the
probe-pointed bistoury, make an opening into the bladder of the same
size as the external wound. I now with the point of my finger hold the
bladder against the edge of the wound, withdraw the sonde , pass down
the forceps, and thus remove the stone. It is very easy, gentlemen ;
but I have seen quite enough of this operation.

A French surgeon, some time since, finding that a calculus was too
large to be extracted by the lateral operation, immediately performed
the high operation ; he made a tolerably free incision, and upon seeing
something he did not expect, exclaimed, “ Mon Dieu ! voila l' inlestin!”
After some difficulty, the intestines were returned, and the Frenchman
very coolly asked an English surgeon, who was standing by him, how
long he thought the patient would survive ? He received for answer,
“ Probably forty-eight hours.” “ Oh, non!" said the operator, “ vingt
rjuatre au plus ,’ and truly the Frenchman was right, for at the end of
twenty-four hours the patient was dead.

It has lately been proposed to remove stones from the bladder by
performing the



320



OPERATION OF LITHOTOMY.



OPERATION or LITHOTOMY THROUGH THE RECTUM.

It is recommended, gentlemen, because it is simple— because it can
be easily done; but notwithstanding this, I can tell you that it is a
dangerous operation. I have known it performed but in two instances,
— one patient died from inflammation of the rectum— and the other re-
covered, but with the dreadful misfortune of having a fistulous com-
munication between the rectum and bladder. Be upon vour guard
respecting these pretty little — easy — simple operations ; do not be misled
by adopting them. Always reflect upon the nature of the parts on
which you are going to operate ; steadily keep your eye on the ultimate
success of your cases — not upon the applause you may derive from the
neatness or facility with which your operations are accomplished ;
and ever bear in mind, that upon the successful issue of your operations
will your reputation depend.



LECTURE XLI.

Before I showed you the operation for stone in the last lecture, 1 was
speaking of the difficulties which arise in the extraction of stones from
various circumstances ; as, for example, where the stone is excessively
large, or where the perinseum is very deep. A deep perinseum is a great
obstacle ; the distance of the bladder from the external parts throws
great difficulties in the way of the operation. The force which it is
necessary to employ in such cases is often so great as to lead to the
destruction of life. When a stone of considerable magnitude is accom-
panied with an enlargement of the prostate gland, the patient rarely
recovers from the operation. A number of small calculi in such cases
is of less importance, but a large stone, accompanied with an enlarged
prostate, generally leads to a fatal result. Mr. Henry Earle has con-
structed an instrument, for the purpose of breaking large stones in the
bladder by means of a perforating screw. I have not had an oppor-
tunity of making use of it ; but it appears to me to be well constructed
for that purpose, and very likely to succeed. It is undoubtedly a very
desirable thing to break stones, in cases either of a deep perinaium, or
an enlarged prostate, and the invention of such an instrument cannot
but be advantageous to the profession. When I say that cases of large
stone, accompanied with enlargement of the prostate gland, generally
terminate unfavourably, I do not mean to be understood that the en-
larged prostate necessarily leads to the destruction of life, but the patient
very rarely recovers his health perfectly afterwards, so as to be free from



OPERATION OF LITHOTOMY.



321



the symptoms of the disease. Patients under these circumstances gene-
rally suffer very much from the enlargement of the prostate after the
stone is removed. I remember a curious case of a French gentleman
who was operated upon for stone by Mr. Cline, senior. Mr. Cline hap-
pened to take out his watch, and to make some indifferent observation;
the patient, however, thought he said that it was dinner-time. He
recovered from the operation, but as he still suffered occasionally from
symptoms of stone, instead of being grateful for having been relieved
by the operation, he used constantly to say that Mr. Cline was in a
hurry for his dinner, when he performed the operation, and had left a
stone in his bladder. This gentleman died some time after, and left
five guineas to myself or any other surgeon, except Mr. Cline, to exa-
mine his bladder after death, for the purpose of ascertaining whether a
stone had not been left there. I happened to be out of town at the time,
but Mr. Ramsden, who was then surgeon at St. Bartholomew’s Hos-
pital, on examining the body, found that the stone had been completely
removed, but that the gorget on entering the bladder had nearly sepa-
rated a small portion of the prostate gland, so that a little valve was
formed on the inner side of the bladder, which fell occasionally over the
beginning of the urethra, when the patient attempted to make water.
When this happened, he was under the necessity of remitting the at-
tempt to discharge his urine, and suffered great pain. I shall send round
the preparation, in which you will see the portion of the prostate nearly
separated by the gorget.

It not unfrequently happens that a cyst is formed in the bladder, in
which the stone is either partially or entirely contained. If the cyst
includes the stone entirely, the symptoms of stone cease. It happened
very fortunately for the person who obtained the reward from parlia-
ment, for discovering a medicine, capable of dissolving stone in the
bladder, that he gave his medicine to a person in whose bladder a cyst
of this kind formed. It was fully established that a stone had been
distinctly felt by some of the most eminent surgeons in the metropolis,
before this person took the medicine ; and after he had taken the me-
dicine for some time, the stone could no longer be felt. On examination
of the body after death, however, it appeared that the stone had escaped
into a cyst, by which it was completely enclosed, so that it no longer
produced any irritation in the bladder. There is a preparation on tile
table, which will illustrate the appearance of such a cyst, the mucous
membrane passing between the muscular fibres, and forming a cavity
through the coats of the bladder large enough to admit the stone. When
the stone is partly in the cyst, and partly in the bladder, you may
sometimes open the cyst, and remove the stone without opening the



322



OPERATION OF LITHOTOMY.



bladder. An example of this occurred lately in a child at the other
hospital, who had slight symptoms of stone. On sounding the child I
felt a stone, but as it did not give the usual impression to the sound, I
passed my finger into the rectum, and felt the stone confined in a bag
above it. On raising the stone with my finger, it struck firmly against
the sound. I did not open the bladder in this case, but passing my
finger into the rectum, and carrying a knife through the perinseum
above the rectum, I opened the cyst, and extracted the stone from it.
The child did not pass its urine through the opening after the first day,
and the wound healed very readily. I have seen Mr. Chandler extract
a stone from a cyst in a child, by means of a probe-pointed bistoury ;
he dilated the mouth of the cyst, so as to be enabled afterwards to
extract the stone. In general, cysts in the bladder containing stones
are connected with an enlarged state of the prostate gland.

There is a preparation illustrating this state, which was taken from
a patient who died from the operation in the other hospital. The re-
peated attempts which were made to extract the stone, which did not
succeed till after a great length of time, produced great irritation, and
ultimately ulceration of the bladder, which led to the destruction of life.
A great number of small stones, to the amount of thirty, forty, or
more, are sometimes found lodged in a cyst, situated behind the prostate
gland. There is a practical point which ought not to escape my at-
tention or yours ; and that is, that the bladder sometimes undergoes a
partial contraction, so that the stone is completely embraced by it.

Here is an example taken from a child, which died from this cause at
the other hospital when I was an apprentice; there is another example
of this partial contraction of the bladder in the collection. The way in
which it happens is this : surgeons are generally anxious to allow the
patient to retain a considerable quantity of urine in his bladder in order
that the sudden gush of water, on the introduction of the gorget, may
inform them that the instrument has reached the bladder. This practice
is, however, wrong ; because, when the patient is allowed to retain a
considerable quantity of urine, the bladder suddenly contracts, when it
is discharged, and so firmly embraces the stone, that when you intro-
duce the forceps there is no space between the bladder and the stone,
and the instrument constantly slips from the stone. In this way the
patient is often exhausted by the repeated attempts at its extraction.
I once saw a patient of Mr. Travers under these circumstances, though
he afterwards recovered from the operation. I have no doubt he well
remembers the case to which I allude; immediately after the gush of
urine, the bladder contracted at its fundus, and the forceps slipped re-
peatedly from the stone, in the manner which I have described. Soft



OPERATION OF LITHOTOMY.



323



stones require the use of the scoop ; a number of calculi will require
either the frequent introduction of the forceps, or the use of the scoop.

I do not recollect that there is any other circumstance which I need
mention to you respecting the lateral operation for stone.

After-Treatment With respect to the after-treatment, some sur-

geons inject the bladder, with a view of removing every remaining frag-
ment of stone. This is not the practice in these hospitals, and I am
by no means satisfied that it is of any use. It might have been neces-
sary when dressings were applied to the wound, but this is never done
now ; the wound is left open, so that the urine may distil as freely as
possible. In this way any remaining portion of calculous matter is
carried away, and there is no danger of its accumulating in the bladder.
The after-treatment consists in giving the patient opium as soon as the
operation is over ; indeed, in some cases where the patient is exceed-
ingly irritable, I give opium two or three hours before the operation is
performed. I do this with two views ; first, because the opium deadens
the sensations of the patient, and he suffers much less pain from the
operation ; and secondly, because it renders him much less irritable
after the operation. The patient often falls into a composed and tran-
quil sleep in consequence of the opium, instead of rolling about the
bed in an irritable state. The opium, therefore, acts beneficially, by
diminishing immediate and remote irritability, and I have never found
it produce any improper effect. It will be proper to give diluents very
freely to the patient ; a small quantity of soda or potass should be put
in his diluted drink ; gum may also be added, as it is believed to have
the power of soothing the parts, and diminishing the irritating quality
of the urine. Whether it have that effect or not is doubtful ; but it is
generally believed to have some influence in this way. The danger
after the operation for stone is, that of peritoneal inflammation. On
the day after the operation, therefore, you should put your hand on the
lower part of the patient’s abdomen, and inquire whether he feels any
pain. If there is any tenderness of the peritoneum, you should apply
eeches to the abdomen, and foment it; it will be often necessary to
ake away blood, and to put the patient in a warm bath, if the symp-
ms should be urgent ; vomiting is a frequent symptom, when the
^bdomen of the patient is in a tense state. The subsequent treatment
rill consist in giving considerable doses of the submuriate of mercury,
.alomel is a very useful medicine in this case, not only as a purgative,
>ut because, combined with opium, it diminishes irritability, and lessens
he disposition to inflammation in the abdomen. Purgatives and
( nodyne injections should also be administered. The time in which a
atient recovers is generally from seventeen to twenty-one days, under



324



ON CALCULI IN THE URETHRA.



favourable circumstances. It is sometimes longer when the per in mum
is deep ; on the other hand, I have known a patient to he well in a
fortnight after the operation. The urine frequently passes in the right
course in about twenty-four hours after the operation; sometimes, how-
ever, not till after three or four days ; this will depend, in a great
measure, on the size of the stone. In general, the patient has a rigor,
when the urine returns to its natural course; you need not, therefore,
be alarmed at this symptom.

OK CALCULI IK THE URETHRA.

When a stone is lodged in the urethra, it is fouud in three situations ;

I will endeavour to explain to you the difference of treatment required,
according to the situation in which the stone is found. When you find
a stone in the urethra, it will be in vain to attempt to extract it with
the forceps ; even when it is felt very near the orifice of the urethra,
or when you can see it by opening the orifice, you can very rarely
succeed in extracting it with the forceps. There are three situations in
which a stone is found lodged in the urethra ; first, in the perinamm ;
secondly, opposite the scrotum ; and, thirdly, opposite the ftsenum.
When it is lodged in the perinseum, and the patient is labouring under
retention of urine from that cause, he very much on your guard not to
displace it from its situation, or thrust it hack towards the bladder, as
you will be in danger of subjecting the patient to the necessity of after-
wards submitting to the operation for lithotomy. What you should
do is to pass the largest sized bougie into the passage, so as to reach
the anterior extremity of the stone; you should then tie the bougie to
the penis, so that the urine may not escape by the side, and let it re-
main for a considerable time in the urethra. The patient will have an
urgent desire to make water, but you must desire him not to attempt to
pass his urine until you give him permission to do so. When the |
urgency to make water is so extreme, that the patient can no longer |
endure it, untie the bougie from the penis ; and as soon as it is with- i
drawn the urine accumulated behind the stone will gush forward, and i
the stone will generally pass into the vessel into which the patient dis-
charges his urine. In this way you will generally succeed in getting:
rid of extraneous bodies from that part of the urethra. I have known
a bougie remain four hours in the urethra, before the distress arising
from the accumulation of urine was sufficient to justify the propriety
of withdrawing it. The second situation in which stones are found in I •
the urethra is opposite the scrotum. In this situation they sometimes j i ■-
prove fatal. There is a preparation on the table taken from a child. h ‘
which died from this cause: the scrotum in this case was extremel)



ON CALCULI IN THE URETHRA.



325



enlarged and reddened : the perineum was also inflamed, and gangrene
took place, which led to the destruction of life. When the stone is
lodged opposite the scrotum, there is danger of the urethra giving
way, and the urine escaping into the cellular tissue. When you
have ascertained by the probe that the stone is in this situation,
you must endeavour to push it about an inch behind the scrotum,
where you should make your incision. It is wrong to make the
incision through the scrotum itself, if you can avoid it; but if you
are obliged to do so, in consequence of your being unable to push back
the stone, make the opening as large as possible, so that the water may
pass with great freedom through the cellular tissue, and escape exter-
nally. The third situation in which stones are lodged in the urethra
is opposite the frasnum, where it will be necessary to adopt a different
plan. I have told you that you can very rarely succeed in extracting
them with the forceps ; what you must do is to curve the end of a probe
as much as possible ; pass it down the urethra beyond the stone ; and
then withdrawing it, you will generally succeed in extracting the stone.
The reason why you cannot extract it with the forceps is, that when
you try to bring the forceps forward, you pull the urethra back on the
stone, and consequently, you do not move the stone itself. I once had
a pair of forceps constructed similar to those used in midwifery, of
which the two blades were separately introduced into the urethra, and
afterwards locked externally. The probe, however is most easily intro-
duced : if there should be great resistance, you may enlarge the urethra
a little w'ith the knife at the framum. A curious case occurred the other
day, in which I extracted two calculi from a man’s urethra. I did not
know that I had such an operation to perform, and therefore I had no
opportunity of giving you previous information of it. The man was
suffering under retention of urine from stricture ; I did not know that
I was to meet with calculi, but the way in which I operated was this :
— I passed a sound, or staff, into the urethra, down to the stricture, and
instead of turning it towards the bladder, I turned the point of the
instrument towards the perinajum, so that the urethra was quite promi-
nent tomards me. I made a cut in the course of the urethra, a little
below the instrument, and finding something very hard there, which I
believed to be stone, I extended the cut and found a stone. I then di-
vided the urethra to a considerable extent, and a stone larger than a . three-
ounce grape-shot passed through the opening. When I had removed this,
a smaller stone made its appearance. This stone was lodged in a cup
in the upper part of the larger stone. The appearance of the stones,
which were completely locked and fitted to eacli other, was extremely
beautiful. The next step was to put the- patient in a situation to have

F F



326 ON STONES IN THE PROSTATE GLAND.

a catheter passed. I pushed the sound onward through the strictured
part, and, having cut the part with a knife, I introduced my finger into
the wound, and carried it into the bladder. A similar case occurred to
me in a former period of my life ; the form of the stone was exactly the
same, and the treatment I pursued very much the same as I have just
described.

OF STONES IN THE PROSTATE GLAND.

Stones in the prostate gland differ in composition from those in the
bladder ; they consist of phosphate of lime. There are two species of
calculi in the prostate ; those which pass from the bladder in conse-
quence of ulceration, and those which are found in the cyst formed in
the prostate gland itself. There is a preparation on the table, in which
three calculi are seen lodged in the prostate, in consequence of ulceration
opening from the bladder, and another in which there is a number of
calculi contained in a cyst formed in the prostate. Calculi in the pros-
tate gland may be readily detected by introducing your finger into the
rectum. I was once sent for by a Mr. Vaux to a gentleman who was the
subject of retention of urine. I introduced a catheter to what was sup-
posed to have been a stricture, but I felt the instrument pass over a cal-
culus ; I put my finger into the rectum, to ascertain where the stone was,
and pressing upon the prostate gland, I felt the stone just above it. It
afterwards appeared that there were three calculi in his prostate gland.
I told him he might be immediately relieved by suffering me to make
an incision in perinao ; but he was a timid man, and would not consent
to the operation. He lived for some years after, was occasionally the
subject of retention of urine, and died miserably from the effects of the
disease on his kidney. He foolishly chose to die a painful death, when
he might have been easily relieved by a slight operation.

I recently had an elderly gentleman under my care who had an enor-
mous number of calculi in his prostate gland. I do not know how-
many I removed from him, and if I did, 1 should scarcely venture to
say how many. A bottle full of calculi taken from this gentleman has
been preserved. They were not, of course, of a large size. I did not
open the bladder in this case, but, having introduced a staff into the
bladder, I made an incision in the perinaeum towards the prostate
gland, and, putting my finger into one lobe of it, I found a quarry of
calculi. I removed some of them with my finger, and some with a small
pair of dressing forceps. I then opened the other lobe, and extracted a
number of stones which were imbedded in it. I have since had occa-
sion to see this gentleman, and again removed a number of calculi from
the prostate gland. It may be said that there is a little difficulty in the
operation of opening the prostate gland, but a man who is acquainted with



OPERATION FOR STONE IN THE FEMALE. 327

the anatomy of the parts, and who has studied his profession, will never
talk of difficulty ; and if he is not well acquainted with the anatomy
of the parts, he ought not to touch the human body as a surgeon. I
have heard it observed that to make an opening into the urethra is a
difficult operation — Ridiculous ! A man who has studied his profes-
sion, and dissected the human body, ought to be flogged if he cannot
open the urethra with the greatest ease. I shall now proceed to the

OPERATION FOR STONE IN THE FEMALE.

And I here am a little afraid of my friend, for I shall have occasion
to mention some odd stories. (A laugh). Calculi form as readily in
the female as in the male ; but the female is much less frequently the
subject of the operation of lithotomy, in consequence of the shortness
of the meatus urinarius, and the ease with which stones pass away from
it. I think the symptoms of stone in the female are more urgent
than those in the male. It is horrible to witness the suffering which
a woman experiences in consequence of this disease. She has a dreadful
pain at the extremity of the meatus urinarius, and in addition to this
there is a forcing down of all the lower parts of the pelvis, as if they
were about to protrude ; a frequent disposition to make water, and all
the pains suffered during delivery. There is generally a prolapsus
uteri, and a discharge of bloody urine. In addition to these symptoms,
there is almost constantly an incontinence of urine ; a great urgency to
discharge it, and an incapacity to retain it. The constant excoriation
of the parts from this cause keeps the patient in a most offensive state.
There is some variety as to the situation in which stones are found in
the female : they are sometimes lodged in the urethra and vagina. A
curious instance of this kind happened to my old friend, Mr. Cline,
who took me, when I was an apprentice, to the first operation for stone
in the female, which I witnessed. In this case he felt a stone just at the
beginning of the meatus urinarius, at the neck of the bladder, and, on
passing his finger into the vagina, he found a portion of stone in that
situation. He removed the portion of stone from the vagina, and then
dilating the meatus urinarius with the gorget, he extracted the other
portion of stone. The two portions formed a 3 ort of chain-shot, a bar
between the urethra and vagina communicating between them. You
must be upon your guard, however, gentlemen, against imposition in the
female ; for extraneous bodies often find their way into the meatus
urinarius of the female in a very extraordinary manner. Stones of very
considerable size will pass by the meatus urinarius in the female, with-
out the necessity of performing an operation. Here is a specimen of a
large stone which passed from a patient of Mr. Giraud, a surgeon of



.

328 CALCULI IN THE SUBMAXILLARY DUCT.



H



LECTURE XLII.

The subject with which I propose to occupy your attention this
evening is the diseases of the breast ; but before I proceed to them I
have a few words to say to you on calculi in the submaxillary duct.

CALCULI IN THE SUB MAXILLARY DUCT.

Stones are occasionally found in the duct of the submaxillary gland,
and produce irritation, the cause of which is unintelligible to the patient,
and often not distinguished by the surgeon. The unpleasant feelings
produced by stones in this part occur at and after meals ; the stones
arrest the progress of the saliva, and produce irritation of the surround,
ing muscles ; a swelling forms at the orifice of the duct ; day after day
the swelling returns, and at last the patient puts his finger along the
side of the tongue, feels something hard there, and by this means it is
discovered that there is a stone in the submaxillary duct, which has
produced the accumulation of saliva, and given rise to the irritation ex-
perienced by the patient. Sometimes a small channel is formed through



great respectability. The patient had suffered for a length of time
from this stone, when one night, on getting out of bed and discharging
her urine, she heard something fall into the vessel, and on a light being
brought, this stone was found to have passed. Mr. Hcadington had a
patient from whom a much larger stone had passed in the same way.
Stones may be removed from the female either by dilating the meatus
urinarius or by lithotomy. The extraction by dilatation is, however,
greatly to be preferred, not only because there is much less danger in
it, but because it does not leave behind the melancholy consequences of
lithotomy in the female, I mean, the loss of the retention of urine. A
woman who undergoes the operation of stone generally loses, for ever
after, the power of retaining her urine. Her condition, therefore, is
most deplorable; the constant discharge of urine, and the constant ex-
coriation of the parts, render her offensive to all around her ; her health
is broken, and she is completely cut off from all society.

The learned professor proceeded to perform on the dead subject the
operation of dilating the meatus urinarius, and extracting the stone from
the bladder of the female. The forceps employed for this purpose was
an instrument constructed upon his own suggestion by Mr. Weiss — a
gentleman, observed the learned professor, whose ingenuity enables
him to avail himself of the slightest hint, and to produce mechanical
contrivances admirably adapted for the purposes for which they may
be suggested.






ON DISEASES OF THE BREAST.



329



the stone, which allows of the escape of the saliva ; but in all cases
the degree of irritation depends on the retention of the saliva. A gentle-
man with whom I formerly lived had a stone in his submaxillary duct,
and he used to say to me that he had a curious sensation in his mylo-
hyoideus muscle, a spasm of that muscle ; this continued for weeks
and months ; but one day he sent for me, and said that he had dis-
covered the cause of the irritation that he had so long felt in the mylo-
hyoideus muscle ; that it was a stone formed in the submaxillary duct:
he requested me to take it out for him, which I did. With respect to
the operation required for the removal of stones from this part,— you
must place your finger under the jaw, and press against the gland ; an
assistant holds the cheek on one side, so as to bring it as far as possible
to the ear ; you then perceive the duct under the tongue ; you raise the
duct and tongue, and feel for the stone ; and, having discovered it, you
elevate the cyst, and with a cataract knife cut on the stone, and then
with the end of a hook you pull it out ; it is very easily removed, and
there is no danger of wounding any vessels, supposing you press the
duct towards the mouth ; if you omit this, you may wound some artery,
and have troublesome hemorrhage ; raise, then, the duct as much as
you possibly can in performing this operation.

We now come to the diseases of the breast.

You find the breast subject to cancerous affections, and others of a
different character ; some that are not dangerous to life, though they
require an operation for their cure — others that are not dangerous, and
do not require an operation — and you find it also subject to some dis-
ease which, with an operation or any other means that you may try,
generally terminate unsuccessfully. We shall first speak of the

HYDATID, OR ENCYSTED SWELLING OF THE BREAST.

The breast is liable to the formation of a swelling, which is at first
hard, and afterwards passes into the fluid state, called the hydatid, or
encysted swelling of the breast ; it consists of numerous cysts con-
taining water, as in hydatids or cysts that are found in any other part

of the body. There are but two species of this complaint the one

which contains a fluid, like serum in cells— the other a globular hydatid,
such as is found in the liver and other parts of the body ; in the breast
this kind of hydatid is occasionally found. The hydatid swelling at the
beginning is of solid feel, and I know of no mark which distinguishes
it in this state from that of chronic inflammation of the breast, or such
as is produced by the retention of milk. Now and then, although it is
exceedingly rare, I have seen at the commencement a number of little
swellings, resembling peas in size, and containing water ; however, in

F f 2



330



ON DISEASES OF THE BREAST.



general, there is no diagnostic mark at the onset, between this affection
and the state produced by common inflammation of the breast. There
is no pain in the part, except just prior to menstruation, when it becomes
painful ; at other times pain is absent. After the swelling has continued
some little time, without any feeling of fluctuation in it, it may be
divided into a solid and fluid part, and on putting the hand on it you
are able to say, “ Here it is solid, there fluid,” but all this time it is
wholly unattended with pain. Another circumstance deserving atten-
tion is, that the skin is quite free from discoloration, excepting a. little
prior to ulceration, when the part about to ulcerate changes colour.
The complaint is entirely unaccompanied with constitutional derange-
ment. At the time when ulceration commences, the constitution will
he affected by irritable fever, the same as is always met with when the
process of restoration is set up in any other part of the body. But the
disease does not affect the constitution in any serious degree. This
swelling is first hard — in the second place, fluid, — thirdly, unattended
with pain — and fourthly, there is no particular constitutional irritation,
excepting when ulceration commences, and then it is slight, and not at
all alarming to the patient’s mind. This disease never requires removal
on account of any thing malignant in its character, but it is generally
done at the solicitation of the patient, in consequence of the inconve-
nience she experiences from the size and bulk of the breast.

When it has acquired any considerable magnitude, a slight inflamma-
tion begins in one part, and then this ulcerates, which allows of the dis-
charge of a serous fluid. This being discharged and the cyst empty,
suppuration, with partial adhesive inflammation, is set up, and the cyst
becomes obliterated : another undergoes the same process, and so on,
one after another. A sinus seems to form, which leads from that in a
state of suppuration to another cyst, and thus it undergoes the same
change as the one with which it communicates ; iu other parts the cysts
do not break in this way, as in the ovarium ; one cyst bursts, another
remains unopened ; they are distinct — so in the breast, they are divided
into different bags ; but one or two ulcerate and suppurate, which com-
municate with the rest, and then the breast gradually wastes. I have
never seen an instance of this affection cured by natural means ; it re-
mains for months and years, the cyst sometimes breaking one after ano-
ther, and thus the breast wasting, till little of it remains. It occurs at
almost any period after puberty under twenty and after fifty ; between
fifty and sixty, and I have seen one case of it in a person above sixty.
In persons under twenty I have met with several instances, and you
more frequently see it in the young than in advanced age ; from fifteen
to twenty-five more so than after that age.



ON DISEASES OF THE BREAST.



331



It sometimes acquires a most extraordinary magnitude. I operated
once on a lady from Northamptonshire for this complaint, and the
breast weighed, I think, fourteen pounds. I am not quite sure as to the
exact weight, but I know it was of an immense size. I operated lately
on a lady not very far from my own house ; the removed breast weighed
thirteen pounds, and consisted of an immense number of cysts. I was
to have operated on a patient this very day for this complaint, but not
having time I was obliged to postpone the operation ; probably I shall
do it to-morrow ; I will bring the removed part down with me, in order
that you may be masters of the appearances which are produced in the
breast, under this state. A great many mistake this complaint for the
malignant cyst ; but he is extremely ignorant, gentlemen, who can mis-
take the one for the other ; for the two diseases are very different in their
character. Of the causes of this complaint we know nothing, nor of
the production of the cysts ; these are points involved in obscurity. On
dissection, the following are the appearances of a true hydatid breast: —
It contains a globular hydatid, the same as is met with in other parts of
the body ; this produces a cyst, which becomes the parent of others, and
when you open it, you see little ones growing from the internal mem-
brane of the cyst. Many of you recollect that I opened an hydatid cyst
in the thigh of a man at the other hospital a few months ago, and that
a great number of small hydatid cysts were drawn off ; I ordered some
of them to be preserved ; the internal lining of the first cyst is like an
uterus to the others ; these grow from it in spots here and there, and at
last become parricides, for they destroy the parent ; thus it is in the
breast, exactly the same as in the liver.

When the swelling has acquired a considerable magnitude the ope-
ration is generally performed for its removal ; the patient is anxious that
it should be performed ; if she asks, is there any danger if left alone, you
can assure her that there is none ; yet as long as she feels the swelling,
she is incapable of enjoying life — gives way to desponding feelings of
every kind; insists on the operation being performed, and thus is the
surgeon obliged to do it on account of the patient’s solicitations. I tell
you, assure her there is no danger to life, and still she persists in having
it done. The operation is neither dangerous at the time, nor in the
future, to the patient’s life. The largest breast with this affection that
I ever removed, was done without the constitution suffering in the least
degree. The patient’s life is not in danger from it, and as for the
disease, you never find it return in any other part of the body. If any
diseased part should be left on the gland, there will be a chance of the
return of the disease. If so, other hydatids form in the same breast,
but not in the other ; therefore, the best plan is to take away the glan.



332



ON DISEASES OF THE BREAST.



dular structure of the breast, and all the diseased part being removed,
the complaint will not return. Although the removal of the breast is
the plan usually adopted, yet I will tell you a mode of treatment which
I have employed with success when there has been a single cyst. I will
give you two examples, which will illustrate the nature of it better than
any thing else. I do not know that it has been described by authors, but I
will not speak positively of this, for God forbid that I should be obliged
to read one-half or one-fourth of what is published now a-day.

Case I A young woman was sent by a respectable medical practi-

tioner to Guy’s Hospital, with a swelling of the breast, and for the pur-
pose of knowing whether an operation was necessary for its cure. She
was nineteen years of age, and when I examined the swelling it was
moveable, and I was almost inclined to suppose that it was scirrhous ;
but her constitution was sound, her general health exceedingly good,
and I said no operation ought to be performed. I kept her in the hos-
pital some weeks to see the progress of the complaint ; but the girl
being tired of waiting any longer, left the hospital. I lost sight of her
for three years, at the expiration of which time she came back to Guy’s
with a considerable swelling of the breast, which on examination I
found to be partly solid, and partly fluid. The gentlemen assembled
in the theatre to see the operation ; I ordered this patient into the room,
and said that I should not remove the breast, but simply introduce a
lancet into it, and open the swelling. Having done this, water, paler
and less coloured than serum, escaped in abundance through the open-
ing. I said, “ All that it will be necessary to do here, will be to pro-
duce the adhesive or suppurative inflammation. Do not close the
opening till the adhesive process has commenced, and glued the sides of
the cyst.” This was done, the sides of the cyst were glued together,
the opening was closed, and the patient was discharged quite cured.

Case II. — During the last summer a lady came to me with a swell-
ing of the breast, not very large, but hard. At first I was led to think
it scirrhous, but did not decide on its character ; and on looking at the
constitution of the patient, I was pretty well assured that it was not
scirrhous, nor of a malignant kind. I said that I would watch it ;
and told the patient that all it was necessary to do would be to attend
to the state of her bowels. She came to me from time to time, and I
perceived that in the centre some fluid was forming. After some time the
fluid accumulated, and one day I put a lancet into the swelling, and dis-
charged a quantity of serum. I put some lint into the wound so as to
form a tent to preserve the opening : in a short time granulations arose
from the bottom of the cyst, and the lady became perfectly cured, no
disease having returned in the breast. It will be proper to put you ou



ON DISEASES OF THE BREAST.



333



your guard against malignant diseases of the breast, which are not so
numerous as is thought. A great number of the affections of the breast
are capable of cure ; and it requires attentive observation to distinguish
one from the other ; therefore when you see diseases of the breast, do
not be in too great haste to put them under any classification, for if you
do, you will frequently be liable to error.

We now come to the scirrhous tumour of the breast. There arebut
two malignant diseases of the breast ; this is one of them, and the other
is the fungous tumour. The scirrhous tumour is the one which I shall
describe in this evening’s lecture, of the other I shall speak at a future
time.



OF THE SCIRRHOUS BREAST.

This is an extremely frequent disease, and its symptoms are as
follow : The first symptom of scirrhous breast is the discovery (as the
patient says, by accident) of a hard and moveable swelling ; now and
then a little blood is discharged from the nipple, which stains the shift;
this is produced by the inflammation extending along one of the lac-
tiferous tubes, and thus blood is discharged. The swelling is attended
with little pain. At first it is moveable, free from pain, and circum-
scribed. In this last respect there are varieties ; it sometimes happens
that the inflammation extends, and the disease is lost in the surrounding
parts, yet it generally happens that you can mark out the exact situation
of the tumour. In this case it continues a long time, for weeks and
months gradually increasing, and at last the second set of symptoms
come on. A violent darting pain is felt in the breast; the patient says
it is like a knife or lancet being pushed into it ; there is also a burning
sensation in the part, and the patient feels worse a little before men-
struation — about four days before that period ; indeed if you trace the
disease, you will see that for the first fortnight after the periodical dis-
charge the symptoms are less severe, but that for the last fortnight, and
a little before the show of the menses, the pain is excessive ; it is not
a continued pain, but comes at times, and is so severe as to make the
patient start from the chair. I should say that the increase of the
size of the breast is not equal, and that it does not follow any regular
progression; it increases by starts; prior to menstruation it gains in
size ; after the menses have appeared, it again loses. The next cir-
cumstance is, that the glands in the axilla begin to enlarge, or those
between the axilla and breast. The skin around the nipple has a
puckered appearance ; it is drawn in at the centre, and is elevated on
the sides. This gives the part an appearance resembling that produced
by ulceration and cicatrization ; the skin is drawn in, and thus it pre-



334



ON DISEASES OF THE BREAST.



seats the appearance of cicatrization without the reality. In the pro-
gress of the complaint a number of small black spots will be seen on
the breast, and these increase as the breast enlarges. In the second
stage, inflammation on the skin and nipple comes on, and the cellular
membrane partakes of the character of the disease. I have seen
scirrhous of the skin as well marked as that of any other part. The
third set of symptoms arises from suppuration going on in the part,
for the breast undergoes the same process as any other part affected
with cancerous disease. It is not true that pus is in general secreted,
but after the adhesive process has been set up, there is an attempt at
the formation of pus, which if it forms, is not general, being only in
some parts, and not in the others ; and it is more properly a sanious
serum, as it has not the common character of pus. This arises from
the attempt at its formation being imperfect; and if you open the
swelling, a quantity of bloody serum will be discharged. Prior to an
opening being formed, the skin becomes livid, and the breast is very
painful in that part where it opens. In general, the opening is not
made by art, as the object is to prevent ulceration as long as you can ;
but when the ulcerative state has begun the glands above the clavicle
enlarge, the arm swells first just above the elbow, then it extends over
the hand and fore-arm, and upper arm. There is an interruption to the
functions of the absorbent system ; the blood is not returned by the
veins ; an increased secretion takes place from the termination of the
arteries ; fluid is thrown out into the cellular tissue, which, when eva-
cuated, coagulates. The constitution is severely affected, there is a dif-
ficulty of breathing ; an inability to lie but on one side, pain in the right
side, and also in the loins : and the patient says that she has rheumatic
feelings all over the bones. The stomach is deranged ; the patient has
severe spasms at the scrobiculus cordis and frequent vomitings ; at last
she becomes worn out from irritation, and expires.

What do you find on dissection ? Is the disease confined to the par-
ticular part, the breast, or are its effects general? — Gentlemen, I will
tell you what you find on examination after death : — The breast is one
solid mass, like cartilage, with very little of vascularity, except its
edges; internally fibrous, but the vessels are few, and pass over its
surface. When the breast has acquired any magnitude, there is ge-
nerally an opening in it ; and then, internally, it has the appearance of
being worm-eaten, and is spongy : at the part where there is ulceration,
it is very vascular, and with the ulceration you will find a bloody serum.
The absorbent glands put on the same character as the scirrhous
breast ; but besides this, the scirrhus extends to the cellular membrane,
the skin and the muscles ; the skin is scirrhous, the cellular membrane



ON DISEASES OF THE BREAST.



335



partakes of the inflammation, and also becomes scirrhous, and the pec-
toral muscles are full of scirrhous tubercles, which are white and solid ;
and thus a great part of its fibres are generally diseased. The glands in
the axilla are of a scirrhous nature ; in the beginning they are solid and
continue so until ulceration commences ; they then become spongy, and
contain asanious serum. The glands above the clavicle are in the same
state, and by pressure on the thoracic duct they cause an interruption to
the process of absorption ; chyle is prevented from being transmitted
into the blood, and thus it is that the appetite is sometimes vora-
cious, whilst the patient is rapidly wasting. But for the chest: — You
find hydrothorax on the side affected, and the absorbent vessels on the
pleura, corresponding to the scirrhous breast, are in a diseased state,
and small white spots, like pins’ heads, will also be seen. I ought to
mention, that you should never operate in this complaint when dyspnoea
is present ; for I have known patients who have come to our hospital,
and have been operated on for this disease when they have had this
symptom, and who have died in two or three days after the operation ;
on examination, water has been found in the chest, and tubercles on the
pleura. Now and then you find on the pleura covering the lungs tu-
bercles on the surface opposite to the diseased breast, and having the
true scirrhous character. But the liver is most frequently diseased : on
the right lobe there are in general tubercles ; the glands of the axilla
being affected, the internal thoracic absorbents carry the diseased matter
to the liver, which becomes tuberculated, and assumes the true scirrhous
character. You rarely find the uterus free from disease ; it is affected
with what are called polypi, but they are rarely scirrhi of that organ ;
hence the pain in the loins, the result of the connexion between the
nerves of the uterus and those of the loins. This is not all the history
of what is met in this complaint, deplorable as it is. I was asked to
see a lady who had fractured her thigh-bone ; I asked her how the
accident happened ? — she stated, by simply turning her thigh over the
edge of the bed. When I was examining it, I saw that the left breast
was in a state of scirrhous ulceration ; I said “ How long have you had
this ?”— she replied, “ For a great number of years.” The thigh
united ; but with so little firmness, that in going into bed one day she
broke it again. I attended another lady, who broke her thigh below
the trochanter major, by very little force; and a gentleman, who was
formerly my assistant, was called to a lady who broke her thigh by
walking across the room — each with a scirrhous affection of the breast.
I was sent for to Sussex once, to see a lady who fractured her thigh by
merely turning in bed, and who had at the same time a scirrhous
affection of the breast ; and what you find on examination of the bones



^36



ON DISEASES OF THE BREAST.



of those affected with scirrhous tumours, is absorption, not only of the
cancellated structure, but also of the shell of the bone. I attended a
lady, with Mr. Young, a surgeon of the city (whose ill health the pro-
fession has deeply to deplore), who had a scirrhous affection of the
breast, accompanied with agonizing pains of the back ; the disease
proceeded, and the patient was at last worn out by irritation. Both
Mr. Young and myself were extremely anxious to ascertain the cause
of the pain of the back, and on examination of the vertebrae, we found
several affected with scirrhous tubercles, and in a state so as to surprise
any one. The bone had been absorbed as far as the scirrhous had
formed, which was as distinct as scirrhus of the breast. I operated on
a patient at the other hospital for a scirrhous breast : the disease re-
turned, and she came back to the hospital to end her days ; she also
had a disease of the spine, from which she had suffered more than from
that of the breast. On examination after death tubercles were found
adhering to her spine ; thus much for the appearances found on dis-
section. I shall conclude by observing, that what I have to say to you
on the diseases of the breast and testis I wish particularly to impress on
your minds ; and I hope that I am not too arrogant in saying that the
knowledge I possess of these diseases is to a considerable degree my

own that it is the result of an extensive observation on both the dead

and the living, and that knowledge to the best of my ability, shall be
communicated to you.



LECTURE XLIII.

I was speaking, at the conclusion of the last lecture, of the dissections
of the scirrhous tubercle, and I promised to bring some preparations
shewing the effects of this disease on different parts of the body. Here
is a part of the thigh-bone, taken from the breast of the patient who
broke her thigh on rising in bed. On examination, there were found
scirrhous tubercles in the thigh-bone, which you have now an opportu-
nity of seeing. Here is a specimen taken from the lady of Sussex, who
had disease of the breast, and fractured her thigh turning herself in
bed ; she had excruciating pain in the thigh after the accident, but she
lived a long time afterwards. On examining the part after death, we
found it affected with scirrhous tubercles, which had commenced in the
cancelli of the bone, and lastly the shell had given way. You will see
the scirrhous tubercle exterior to the bone. I had a specimen sent me
by a practitioner in the country, of the os humeri, which had undergone
a similar change. In opening the body of one of the ladies whose case



ON DISEASES OF THE BREAST.



337



I have mentioned to you, I found the sternum affected with scirrhous
tubercle. 1 stated to you the case that I attended with a respectable
surgeon of the city, where the vertebrae were affected ; and here is a
specimen taken from the patient at Guy’s, who had distorted spine,
and a return of a scirrhous tumour in the breast, after an operation had
been performed. There is a deposit of scirrhous matter on the vertebrae.
These different preparations shew that the formation of scirrhous matter
is not confined to the breast, and that it is only the index of a disor-
dered constitution. (The learned professor sent round the theatre the
different specimens just alluded to, illustrative of the cases which were
mentioned at the end of the last lecture, in order that each student
might have an opportunity of examining them for himself.) I shall
now continue the subject of diseases of the breast, and shall state to you
some further particulars respecting the scirrhous breast.

SCIRRHOUS BREAST.

Married women who bear no children, and single women, are more
subject to this complaint than those who have large families. It is very
probable that the natural change which the breast undergoes in the
secretion of milk has some power in preventing this diseased affection
of the breast, which is certainly less frequently met with in married
persons who bear children, than in married persons who do not, and
those who remain in a state of celibacy ; but it is no security against
this complaint that a woman has borne children. I knew a woman with
this disease who had been pregnant seventeen times ; she had borne
nine children, and had eight miscarriages, so that in the whole she had
been pregnant seventeen times : yet the disease in this person was as
large a scirrhus as I ever witnessed. Although the disease comes on
more frequently iu those who have had no children, in consequence of
the breasts not having undergone the natural change in the secretion
of the milk, yet this is no security against the complaint, though it
lessens the tendency to it. It is generally believed that scirrhous tu-
bercle of the breast is connected with the cessation of the menses. I
believe that if a person has a tumour in the breast which is not malig-
nant, and that it remains so till the change of life takes place, that then
an undue action may be excited in the part, and the tumour becomes
scirrhous just at the cessation of the menstrual discharge. But the
disease generally occurs at an earlier period : the period at which
scirrhous tubercle is usually formed is from thirty-five to fifty years of
age ; more frequently under forty than above it, though I have met
with a great number of cases from forty-four to forty -five years of age ;
however, it is more frequently found under forty than above it. It is



G G



333



ON DISEASES OF THE BREAST.

not a disease of young persons ; it is rarely seen between twenty and
thirty. The youngest person that I ever saw witli this disease was
twenty-seven years old ; I have seen another case in a person of twenty-
nine ; but excepting these two cases, I have never met with it under
thirty. I know that there are many tumours met with at an early age,
which are called scirrhous tumours, but they are not so, gentlemen ;
and the medical man who asserts that they are is deceived as to their
nature, for the tumours found at this age are quite of a different cha-
racter from scirrhous tumours. The disease, then, called scirrhous
tubercle is found from thirty to fifty years of age ; under thirty rarely,
for I have only met with two cases below thirty in the course of a life
which has been favoured with considerable opportunities of watching
this disease. As to the most advanced age at which I have seen this
complaint, it is at eighty -six. A lady, eighty-six years of age, came to
me with a scirrhous tubercle of the breast. 'When she called, she asked,
“ Should it be removed ?” — I said, “ No, keep it; it will not shorten
your life, for this disease is slow in its progress, when occurring in
advanced age.” She probably lived as long with it as if it had been
removed ; the breast never ulcerated, she had no pain in it, and the
patient died of other complaints. However, I removed a scirrhous breast
from a lady who was seventy-three years of age. It had begun to
ulcerate, and the patient was anxious to have it done. Her state was
unpleasant to herself, and the smell from the part offensive to those
around her ; and on these accounts she was anxious to have an operation
performed. It was at her own earnest solicitation, and not at my sug-
gestion, that it was done. The disease did not return, and the patient
did very well. You see, then, gentlemen, that there is no period, how-
ever advanced, at which scirrhous tubercle of the breast does not occur;
but it is not to be met with in the young.

The progress of this complaint is in some persons extremely slow.
In general, however, it destroys in about four years from tbecommence-
ment. It is from two to three years in its growth, and from a year and
a half to two years in destroying life, after it has arrived at its acmd.
When suppuration and ulceration have commenced, and the consti-
tution is disordered, it is even then some time before the patient is
worn out. Four or five years often elapse before life is destroyed. I
have known some curious examples, in which the progress of the
disease to the destruction of life has been exceedingly slow. I men-
tioned to you on a former evening that, in the lady who broke her
thigh by turning in bed, I discovered accidentally at the time that
she had an ulcerated scirrhus of the breast. On feeling the sur-
rounding part, I found a number of scirrhous tubercles, and I said.



ON DISEASES OF THE BREAST.



339



“ Madam, how long have you had this disease? ” “ Twenty-two years,
Sir,” she replied. There was a patient in the other hospital once, who
had an ulcerated scirrhus of the breast, and it had remained in that state
for seventeen years. I am anxious when a patient comes to me with this
horrible complaint, in such a state as to afford her no hope ffom opera-
tion, to mention these examples. I am anxious to say to her, “ Though
your complaint has arrived at that stage in which an operation will be
of no avail, and though it is of that nature which does not allow of cure
by medical means, yet I can tell you of many instances in which it has
been exceedingly slow in its progress, and if you have your life pro-
longed ten or seventeen years you will be perhaps content.” This
excites a beam of sunshine in the breast, and a gleam of joy on the
countenance ; “ Death,” she then says, “ is not so near as I ex-
pected,” and her anxiety of mind is removed by the hope which she
has of the fatal event being procrastinated. It is right, gentlemen, in
humanity, to mention these cases to patients labouring under this most
distressing disease.

It sometimes happens that two or three in the same family are affected
with scirrhous tubercle. I have known it occur in three sisters, who
were related to a medical man. The first would not undergo an opera-
tion, and she died of the disease. The second did undergo the operation
of having the scirrhous tubercle removed from the breast, but she died
of a return of the disease. The third sister is still alive, and the disease
in her has not yet proceeded to a fatal termination. It sometimes hap-
pens that members of the same family will be attacked with this com-
plaint, but this is not invariably the case ; but I do state that it is right
when you observe the disease in one sister, to direct your attention im-
mediately to prevent, as far as you can, its affecting the others.

Now, gentlemen, as to the causes of this disease; it is very frequently
attributed to accident, but this is rarely a cause ; now and then it is the
result of a blow, or pressure on the part, or injury to it in some shape
or other, but this is not often the case. Although the disease operates
on some particular part of the body, yet it is always preceded by a state
of constitution which has excited it. He who looks at this disease in
the light of a local affection only, takes a narrow view of it. A blow
or a bruise inflicted on a healthy person would be followed by common
inflammation only, which would lead to the removal of the matter
effused. But if a blow were received on the breast when the constitution
was in a state disposed to the formation of scirrhous tubercle, it would
be the cause of a particular action being excited in the part injured,
and might lay the foundation of this complaint : therefore you see that
no blow, no pressure on the part, nor any accidental circumstance



340



ON DISEASES OF THE BREAST.



whatever will produce scirrhus if the constitution be sound. There
must be some predisposing cause in the constitution, else it will not
occur. Yet the formation of scirrhous tubercle does not entirely depend
on constitutional derangement ; there must be also a peculiar action
excited in the part, and if there be no specific action, not any of the
scirrhous kind, you will have no appearances of the disease. To show
you that it is dependent on these two states, constitutional derangement
and an altered action in the part, I will mention to you, that if you cut
into a scirrhous tubercle, it will ulcerate, and all the horrors of cancer
will very soon be the result of the injury ; but suppose you cut round
the tumour, in the healthy parts, where the disease has not shown itself,
the wound heals, and no ulceration of the part follows ; and again, after
the removal of a scirrhous breast, the wound usually heals very kindly.
If there is a disposition in the constitution to the production of the
disease in any part, some circumstance exciting a peculiar action in it
must occur, and then scirrhous inflammation is produced. The disease
is made up of a derangement in the constitution, and of a local peculiar
action ; it is the effect of a specific action in the part, preceded by a
disposition in the constitution to its production. The scirrhous tuber,
cle is said to be fibrous ; here let me observe that the fibres do not belong
to it. They are nothing more than the cellular tissue thickened ; if
you were to macerate a scirrhous tumour, you might pick out from the
cellular tissue the scirrhous substance, and it would then have the ap-
pearance of a honeycomb, from the circumstances of the cancerous mat-
ter being removed. This is deposited between the cellular tissue, in the
same manner as the substance of the testicle is between septa.

TREATMENT OF SCIRRHOUS TUBERCLE.

I now come to the treatment of scirrhous tubercle ; and first let me
observe, that we possess no medicine which has any power over the
disease — none which has any specific influence on it ; and those who
say that they have in their possession a medicine which is a specific in
this complaint are empirics, and men entirely lost to all sense of shame,
honour, and honesty. Our profession boasts of no such remedy, and
the medical man has still to seek it. W e have no medicine that will
cure this disease : and it is our duty, as professional men, to say so, in
order to prevent the baneful influence of those quacks who are a dis-
grace to the age in which they live, and who are constantly advertising
nostrums for the cure of cancer. Honestly, then, let me state to you the
fact — we have no medicine that can cure this disease ; but I will tell you
all that can be done by the administration of internal remedies in it. If
a patient applies to you with scirrhous tubercle, and her general health



ON DISEASES OF THE BREAST.



341



is i n a disordered state, you may retard the progress of the disease by
giving alterative medicines, and thus prolong her days. You should
never perform an operation for the removal of a breast, unless the pa-
tient has undergone a course of medicine. Another view with which
medicine is to be given is this : if an operation has been performed, you
should alter the state of the constitution by the exhibition of alterative
medicines, such as Plummer’s pill, and the compound decoction of sar-
saparilla ; or, what I prefer, infusion of gentian, with soda and rhubarb ;
by these means you will improve the constitution, and lessen the chances
of the disease returning. You may alter the constitution, but I defy
any man to disperse scirrhous tubercle when it has formed. No man
of common honesty will pretend to do it. Thus, all we can do by me-
dicine is to change the state of the constitution prior to an operation, so
as to prepare the patient for it ; and when an operation has been per-
formed, we can give alteratives so as to lessen the chance of its returning.
But medicine will not have any effect on scirrhous tubercle when it is
formed ; not one tittle. You may take away the surrounding inflam-
mation by local means, but you can Temove no part whatever of the
scirrhous inflammation. I should have observed just now, when speak-
ing of the causes of this complaint, that one of the most frequent is
grief, or anxiety of mind. It arrests the progress of the secretions,
produces irritative fever, and becomes the forerunner of scirrhous tuber-
cle. How often have I seen, when a mother or a nurse has been watch-
ing, night after night, with anxious solicitude, the pangs and sufferings
of a child, and she had the comfort and gratification of seeing its reco-
very, that in a short time after this she has come to me with an uneasi-
ness of the breast, which, on examination, I discovered to be scirrhous
tubercle. Full three-fourths of these cases arise from grief and anxiety
of mind. It is the state of mind and body which predisposes to this
disease. The mind acts on the body ; the secretions are arrested,
and the result is, the formation of scirrhus. Look, then, in this com-
plaint, not only at altering the state of constitution, but relieve the
mind, and remove the anxiety, if possible, under which the patient
labours.

As to local treatment, we possess no specific local applications. They
can do nothing more than retard, in some slight degree, the progress of
the disease. It is sometimes accompanied by common inflammation,
and evaporating lotions are occasionally used. I do not think you would
act wisely in employing them ; they seem rather to do harm than good.
Warm applications are also improper, if they be of considerable heat.
Under warm applications the disease grows, for they increase the deter-
mination of blood to the part. If poultices are used, they should not

g g 2



342



ON DISEASES OF THE BREAST.



be above the natural heat; but patients generally complain of them as
being uncomfortable. It is better to employ the soap cerate. If there
be much pain with the disease, I order a drachm of extract of bella-
donna to be rubbed down with an ounce of the soap cerate; this dimi-
nishes the nervous irritability of the part, and the advantage of the soap
cerate is, that it excites a gentle perspiration without any undue heat ;
it is the most useful application that I know of. If there be much in-
flammation you can apply leeches, though the mode of treatment which
I like, is to alter the constitution, and the best for this purpose is the ex-
hibition of five grains of Plummer’s pill (the pilula hydrargyri submuri-
atis compositaof thepharmacopceia) at bed-time, and on the following day
R. Infus. gentian, fiss.

Sodee carb. jss.

Tinct. columb. 3k

Ammon, carbon, gr. v.

It is necessary, in this disease, for which no specific is known, to
give those medicines which restore the constitution generally. You
will restore the different secretions by Plummer’s pill, and diminish
the irritability of the nervous system by the carbonate of ammonia ;
this is the best plan, as far as I know, to keep the patient alive as
long as you can. Some say you should pay attention to diet ; so you
should, but if yoq give a patient a vegetable diet, allow her nothing
but water Jo drink, and keep her low, it will be the worst plan
you can pursue ; if her strength is affected, you will by this
means lower it still more, and soon bring her to the grave. I
tell you what every man who has observed for himself knows to
be true — I mean those, at least, who have not spent their lives in
the closet, but in watching disease. If a patient consults me how
she is to live, I say to her, take those things which you find agree with
your own feelings best, and which do not derange the general health.
If she asks, “ Should I take any wine ?” I say “ No” — “ Or any
spirits?” “Certainly not,” (God forbid that women ever should ;)
“ never hurry the circulation, nor take any thing so as to disorder the
constitution, but support the strength by animal food. If you should
ever take any wine, mix it with water.” The patient sometimes says,
she has been told to “ live on vegetable food only my reply is, that
“ I should like to know why you have been told so ; for the man who has
done it knows nothing of the nature of the complaint.” I assure you,
gentlemen, that if you weaken the strength by low diet, you will im-
mediately quicken the pulse : you will perceive it in a person with the
pulse at 80 increase in a short time to 110 and 120, and become small.
Rest assured that, in proportion as you weaken the constitution, you



ON DISEASES OF THE BREAST.



343



quicken the pulse. Do not debilitate it then on the one hand, nor sti-
mulate it on the other ; for if you do, it will be the sure way to hasten
the progress of the disease. It was only yesterday that I met in con-
sultation three medical men (one of whom was Dr. Farre), on a person
affected with scirrhus. Dr. Farre has studied his profession as a profes-
sional man ought — has dissected for himself, and by this means has
become intimately acquainted with the structure of the human body.
He has watched disease with care in every stage, and, when oppor-
tunities have occurred, has pursued morbid anatomy with a zeal not
often equalled ; acquiring a knowledge of the changes produced by dis-
ease on the different parts of the human frame. This is the way to
study medicine : but as to the physician who attends merely to his
pharmacopoeia and prescriptions, which any tyro in the profession can
do as well, he neglects the true means of acquiring professional know-
ledge. One point of discussion at this consultation was, how the pa-
tient should live. 1 waited, as I wished to hear what the others had
to say. “ Shall she live low ?” was asked. “ Certainly not,” said
Dr. Farre. I then said, “ I am very glad, sir, to hear that opinion come
from you.” The conversation on the subject then began (Mr. Travers
also was one of the gentlemen present), and we all uniformly agreed
that what we had observed in every case of cancer or malignant tumour
was, that in proportion as the patient is kept low, you precipitate her
course to the grave ; this is uniformly so, and I particularly dwell on it,
in order to prevent your minds being poisoned by false doctrines. Manv,
I have no doubt, believe an opposite mode of living to be the best, and
conceive that they have seen it do good. They have tried it, and have
thought the patient benefited, without taking into the account every
concomitant circumstance which has had an influence on the ameliora-
tion of the patient s condition. The way to learn the effects of remedies
and different modes of living is to try them without having entertained
any preconceived opinion as to their efficacy. If a remedy is tried
under the supposition that it is sure to do good, the practitioner will
soon think that it does. No ; the only plan is to watch impartially the
effect of medicines on the constitution, for in following the other way I
have mentioned, you will kill more in youth than you will save in age.

Climate has been supposed to have an effect in preventing that state
of constitution which favours the return of the disease ; I tell you it has
no such influence. A person who has scirrhous tubercle in England
would receive no advantage by going to a warm climate, or by any
change whatever. 1 will give you an instance, which will illustrate this
point very well. A woman who was operated on in this country for
scirrhus of the breast, went soon after to the island of Trinidad ; at the



344



ON DISEASES OF THE BREAST.



time she left England the wound had healed. Soon after she reached
Trinidad the tumour returned, and the glands of the axilla became en-
larged. She was brought back to England with her constitution ex-
tremely debilitated : at the time of her return it was winter ; she soon
sank, and died. In England this person had submitted to an operation :
she went to a warm climate soon after ; the disease then made its ap-
pearance again, and she returned to this country in a cold season, which
had no effect in retarding the progress of the complaint ; in the warm
country the disease was not prevented from returning ; in this, its pro-
gress was not arrested by the cold.

OPERATION FOR THE REMOVAL OF A SCIRRHOUS RREAST.

This operation is nothing more than a simple piece of dissection ; it
consists in making a semicircular incision at the upper part of the breast,
and over the tumour : in this step you cut through the vessels which sup-
ply the scirrhus. When the mammary artery and its branches have been
divided, you desire an assistant to compress the vessels by pressure,
just above the incision, and you then go on excavating the parts and
cellular tissue ; the pectoral muscle is laid bare (and it is a good plan
always to do this) ; lastly, it is right to divide the integuments below
the tumour, lest, as it sometimes happens, a gland is enlarged in the
axilla ; then it will be best to remove it, and the intervening part be-
tween it and the breast ; for if you cut out the gland only, the disease
returns, and it is always attended with unfavourable results. The ab-
sorbent vessels are the means by which the disease is communicated to
the other parts. If the glands in the axilla generally are enlarged,
do not operate, for the disease will be sure to return. I never saw an
operation performed under such circumstances successful. After the
breast is removed, bring the edges together by suture ; in the earlier
period of my life I did not adopt this practice ; I have since found that
the wound heals better if sutures are employed than adhesive plaster
only. You put one or two sutures, which keep the edges together;
when you observe a drawing in of the nipple, always secure that part.
This very day I removed a breast with a nipple in this state, in com-
pany with a respectable medical practitioner, and I cut through the
centre of the nipple, to see whether it had any connexion with the tu-
mour. I saw a scirrhous band going across it to the tumour. I would
observe that the scirrhous tumour is not all the disease ; there are roots
which extend to a considerable distance ; and those who gave this dis-
ease the name of cancer probably knew more of its uature than we are
disposed tp give them credit for. It is supposed by some that this
name was given on account of the appearance of the surrounding veins.



ON DISEASES OF THE BREAST.



345



I should rather say that it was from the appearances on dissection than
from anything without. When you dissect a scirrhous tumour, you
see a number of roots proceeding to a considerable distance, and if you
remove the tumour only, and not the roots, there will be little advantage
from the operation ; no glandular structure, nor any of the roots should
be allowed to remain. Bear in mind what 1 said of giving medicines
before and after the operation. Before the removal of a scirrhous tu-
mour, put the patient under a course of alterative medicines, and after-
wards do the same, else the operation will be of no use ; in a large pro-
portion of operations the disease returns ; I have found it difficult to
state an average. If I were asked, “ in one half of the cases ?” I
should say “ no “ if one fourth ?” “ no but the disease returns

in the breast or other parts of the body, after an operation in a great
number of cases — still I perform the operation ; and why ? because I
feel it my duty to say to a patient with this complaint, that “ there is
only one chance for you, and that is, an operation ; it sometimes pre-
vents the return of the disease, and it may do it in your case.” “ If
this is my only hope,” she says, “ I will submit to it immediately.”
Another reason why I perform it is, that now and then you see a
patient with this disease in a state of ulceration, worn out by frequent
bleedings, foetid discharge, and most horrible pains ; by removing it,
hope is again revived, and she is again restored for months, and
sometimes for years, to a state of comparative ease. On these two
accounts, although an operation may be unsuccessful in one case, and
is sure to be so in the other, yet I perform it, for a surgeon is obliged
to do it at the solicitation of his patient.

LECTURE XLIV.

FUNGUS HJESIATODES.

Various names have been given to this disease; it was. originally
called soft cancer, but having been found materially to differ from true
cancerous disease, that name was relinquished, and the one given to it
by the late Mr. Hey, of Leeds, viz., Fungus Hajmatodes, is that which
is now generally employed.

Although this affection has some resemblance to scirrhous tubercle,
yet it differs from it in very many and essential particulars ; one of
which is, that it attacks persons of all ages after puberty : whereas the
scirrhous tubercle, as I explained to you in my last lecture, does not
attack the very young, as we rarely see it under the age of twenty-seven.
It occurs more frequently then in early life than scirrhous tubercle, and



346



ON DISEASES OF THE BHEAST.



not so frequently in advanced years. It is very uncommon to observe
scirrhus before the age of twenty-seven ; but by no means uncommon
to see fungus hsematodes at a much earlier period. This disease, in
its earlier stages, by no means feels so hard as the true scirrhus. When
you press upon it with the finger, the spot readily receives an indenta-
tion ; but upon removing the finger, the hollow which it had produced
becomes instantly filled again.

In the earlier stages, likewise, there is little pain, which is another
strong discriminating mark by which you are enabled to distinguish it
from scirrhous tubercle. Practitioners who, for the first time see this
disease, and who happen to be unaquainted with the positive and nega-
tive diagnostic signs by which it is known, are astonished at the trifling
degree of pain which patients feel when these tumours are pressed upon,
or indeed when they are even roughly examined. This want of tender-
ness, then, want of hardness, and want of pain, are the discriminating
characteristics which direct your judgment towards forming a correct
conclusion as to its true nature ; and at the same time will clearly pour-
tray to you the difference between it and the genuine scirrhus.

In addition to these marks, the tumour which constitutes fungus
hsematodes is not so clearly defined as scirrhous tubercle ; it is difficult
to say where the diseased structure terminates, and where the healthy
structure commences ; the base of the tumour is, therefore, diffused
among the healthy cellular membrane, or other parts where it shall hap-
pen to be situated ; and in this respect differs most decidedly from
scirrhous tubercle, as I explained to you in the last lecture.

There is still, gentlemen, another diagnostic sign in fungus haema-
todes of the breast, which is, that the disease may advance even to sup-
puration and ulceration, without the glands of the axilla becoming at
all affected.

When this disease exists, and is removed by the knife, it will rather
show itself, should it again appear, in some distant part of the body than
in the glands of the axilla. The disease is much quicker in its progress
than scirrhous tubercle ; it grows much faster, the morbid action appears
to be much more active, consequently, in six or eight months it will have
acquired very considerable magnitude; whereas in true scirrhus, at the
expiration of even two years the disease often will not have reached any
remarkable size. I have seen the skin covering fungus hsematodes of a
livid colour as early as the thirteenth week from the commencement of
the disease, and in five months I have known it destroy life; therefore
I am fully justified in saying that it is much more rapid in its progress
than scirrhous tubercle ; for we find that it becomes in the course of a
few months, of considerable bulk, having a livid surface, and a fluctu-



347



ON DISEASES OF THE BREAST.

ating feel ; this sense of fluctuation does in reality arise from a fluid ;
and which fluid, when discharged, has the appearance of coffee. It is
composed of serum, the red particles of the blood, and bile ; that it is
true serum is known by a portion of it coagulating on its admixture
with the alkalis, muriatic and nitric acids, and from the application of
heat ; that there is bile in it is known by the yellow tint which it gives
to white paper. I have at this time, in a bottle, some paper which was
written upon with this fluid some years since, and the yellowness is
perfectly distinct up to the present period. Although the fluid con-
tained in the cyst of fungus hsematodes is of so dark a colour, yet it is
not of a malignant nature ; it sometimes is perfectly transparent, being
much more clear than the serum of hydrocele, having in it less albu-
men, and more water ; but most frequently the fluid is of a dark colour,
resembling coffee, as I before stated to you, and composed of the red
particles of the blood, serum, and bile.

Well, as the diseased action goes on, inflammation is excited, and at
length the cyst bursts ; nature attempts to relieve, by exciting, in the
parietes of the cyst, the adhesive process ; but failing in this attempt,
owing to a peculiarity of constitution, a fungus sprouts forth. Here
(holding up a preparation) you see it- shooting out in the manner de-
scribed ; the edges of the cyst being everted, or turned away from the
fungus. In a short time it becomes of a considerable size, and the dis-
charge from it really enormous; so great, indeed, that it will as com-
pletely wet a handkerchief in the space of half an hour, as if it had been
dipped in water ; and the smell of the discharge is often so disagreeable,
that the surgeon who has seen much of this disease will be acquainted
with its character the moment he enters the patient’s room. Now-, gen-
tlemen, this disease has a continued disposition to slough, and from
which circumstance it occasionally receives a natural cure ; for in-
stances have been known, where the entire tumour has sloughed, and the
wound healed kindly, to the permanent relief of the patient. Mr. Cline
had a patient in this hospital whose fungus separated in the manner I
have just described to you. She was discharged cured from the hospital,
but whether the disease ever after returned I am unable to inform you.

The dissections of those who die of fungus haunatodes show that it
generally exists in different parts of the body at the same period ; and
the cellular membrane, together with many of the glands will be found
studded with tubercles ; for the disposition of the constitution to pro-
duce the disease in one situation naturally operates towards producing
it in another, and thus it will be present in many parts at the same time,
although its severity in one particular spot will be the immediate cause
of death.



348



ON DISEASES OF THE BjREAST.



(The learned lecturer here exhibited to the class several preparations,
illustrative and confirmatory of the foregoing remarks.)

The liver and lungs are very commonly attacked with these tubercles,
the liver so much so, that you are often unable to make the least section
of it without some of them being observable, showing that every part of
this gland is equally filled with them.

The uterus is not unfrequently diseased from fungus heematodes ;
likewise the ovaria ; the cellular tissue ; the brain and medulla spinalis,
but of all the parts of the body most frequently attacked there are none
so much so as tendinous structures. And so desirous, as it were, does
this disease appear to be to attack these parts, that, we find when it is
situated in the breast, it not only grows externally, but penetrates
deeply through the pectoral and intercostal muscles, regularly following
the course of the tendons and tendinous expansions.

CAUSES OF FUNGUS HiESIAT ODES.

When many important parts are affected at the same time, it is evi-
dent that the cause must be constitutional ; in fact, it ever owes its
origin to a peculiarity of constitution. Although it may thus arise in
almost every important organ at the same time, and be thus generally
diffused throughout the system, yet it appears that it may possess merely
a local occupation of a part, and the neighbouring structures be entirely
free from any morbid or diseased action ; for upon removing fungoid
tumours, we find that the wounds thus produced heal as kindly as any
other wounds caused by the extirpation of any other tumours. In mak-
ing this observation, I wish it to be understood most distinctly, that
your incisions are to be made beyond the discoloured or inflamed parts,
for if you cut into the skin which has become reddened, it will, of
course, have taken on its peculiar morbid action, and the disease will
most unquestionably still continue to grow in that situation. There-
fore I particularly caution you never to introduce your knife into the
integuments which surround fungoid tumours, should such integuments
have become discoloured by the influence of the disease. So, likewise,
in amputations for fungoid diseases ; if you do not operate at a suffi-
cient distance from the seat of the malady, you will find that the granu-
lations which form upon the surface of medullary structures, will pos-
sess a fungoid character, and ultimately put on every appearance of the
original disease. Very carefully, therefore, avoid cutting into parts in
the vicinity of fungoid diseases ; and if you do not, depend upon it
that your operations will be rarely successful. It is necessary, for the
purpose of promoting the favourable issue of your operations, that you
should attend to the state of the patient’s constitution, both before and



ON DISEASES OF THE BREAST.



349



after the operation. With this view you should allow him a nutritious
diet, pure air, and a reasonable proportion of exercise ; you should like-
wise prescribe for him, in the way of medicine, either the hydrargyrus
cum creta, or Plummer’s pill, together with some bitter infusion and
soda. Local means are of very little service in this disease ; indeed, I
believe, unless they are assisted by constitutional remedies at the same
time, that they will prove utterly useless. Some practitioners rest their
hope entirely on local applications, but this is truly absurd, as it is next
to impossible that a cure can be effected by them.

It has been attempted to cure fungus haematodes, by causing it to
slough, and it has been endeavoured to accomplish this by means of
pressure, which destroys its circulation ; at the same time, however,
that pressure is employed, you must carefully attend to the state of the
patient’s general health ; for if you do not, your other efforts will be
attended with disappointment. Much has been said respecting the
largeness of the vessels in these tumours ; but if these vessels are large
no danger ought to be apprehended from hemorrhage, as the bleeding
can easily be stopped by means of pressure. The fact is, that blood-
vessels, situated in fungoid tumours, have no contractile power ; con-
sequently, when they are cut into, or divided, the bleeding from them
will continue for a considerable period, unless pressure be employed.

With regard to the success of the operation, it may be said, that it is
more successful at the immediate part operated upon than is the case in
scirrhous tubercle, but it certainly returns more frequently in other
parts of the body, and in which situations it probably existed in an in-
cipient state at the moment that the operation was performed ; it is
altogether an unmanageable complaint, and one which is calculated to
cast opprobrium upon the practice of surgery.

SIMPLE CHHONIC TUMOUR OF THE BREAST.

This disease is not of a malignant character, and by no means dan-
gerous to life; it is generally very young people who are attacked by it,
and we seldom see it in persons above thirty years of age. I will try to
describe, in a familiar manner, the mode in which this disease will be
exhibited to you. A young person, between the age of fifteen and thirty,
will be brought to you by her parents, on account of a swelling in her
breast ; when you look at her, you see that she has a perfectly healthy
appearance, and, in all probability, is much younger than those who
are usually attacked by scirrhous tubercle. Her parents being naturally
anxious for their child’s safety, express their fears of the disease being
cancerous ; at this you smile, and tell them that cancer does not attack
persons of her healthy appearance, or persons so young : upon examin-

II H



350



ON DISEASES OF THE BREAST.



ing the breast you find an exceedingly moveable tumour, but more dif-
fused in the surrounding substance than true scirrhus ; that is, its limits
are not so accurately or distinctly defined, having likewise a lobulated
fee], being divided into distinct apartments by septa, producing the
same kind of sensation to the fingers as fatty tumours ; you have here
(delivering a preparation to a student) an opportunity of seeing this kind
of tumour, and upon carefully examining it, you will find that the ac-
count which I have given you is correct. Well, then, the age and
healthy appearance of the person ; the lobulated feel of the tumour,
and its lying more blended with the neighbouring parts, will at once
point out to you that the disease is not cancerous ; which, gentlemen,
you may inform the person’s parents, and likewise tell them that the
disease never will become cancerous. I assure you that this disease is
not in the slightest degree of a malignant character, neither is it attended
with the least danger. Now then, as to the result of these tumours :
they may grow larger, and may be attended with pain at the periods of
menstruation, but never will prove of serious consequence ; upon that
you may depend. If, however, the mind should be rendered wretched
in consequence of the existence of such a tumour, an incision will in-
stantly enable you to remove it, and thereby allay all mental irritation :
but as far as the tumour is itself concerned, and as regards the health or
safety of the patient, the operation is by no means necessary ; the size of
the tumour is generally from that of a filbert or walnut to that of a bil-
liard ball. Here are some preparations (giving them to the students) in
which you can see their general size and character ; here, however, is
one of very considerable magnitude ; it appeared that the general health
of the woman from whom this tumour was taken, was very little affected ;
she felt pain in the tumour at the menstruating period, but there was no
broken state of constitution, or general debility. The causes of these
tumours are usually obscure ; it is difficult to say what gives rise to
them, but I believe a frequent cause may be traced to the pressure pro-
duced by the whalebone and steel busks usually worn in stays.

Treatment I do not find that medical treatment has any influence

upon these tumours; you may, however, for the purpose of correcting
the state of the constitution, should any thing amiss exist in it, give
the hydrargyrus cum creta, or Plummer’s pill, together with soda and
rhubarb ; these medicines, whatever they may accomplish towards pre-
venting the growth of the tumour, certainly will not disperse it when
once formed ; at all events, if you do not try medicines, you cannot re-
lieve by them : in the use of mercury, however, be particularly careful
not to push it too far, for should you do so, the remedy will prove much
more dangerous than the disease ; and it is likewise a hazardous expe-



ON DISEASES OF THE BREAST.



351



riment to administer mercury to young people who are exposed to the
vicissitudes of our climate. The worst that can happen is the removal
of the tumour by the knife ; an operation which is not attended with
the least danger, and always succeeds in affording permanent relief, for
the disease does not return. The vessels which supply these tumours
are by no means large. I recollect on one occasion, however, when a
surgeon was removing one of them from a woman’s breast in the other
hospital, that upon separating the base of the tumour from its attach-
ment, so violent a gush of blood took place, as for the moment com-
pletely to appal the surgeon, and induce him to believe the knife had
penetrated the patient’s heart ; subsequently it was discovered that one
unusually large vessel, which supplied the tumour, had been divided,
and from thence the violent bleeding arose. Instead of the vessels being
of great size which feed these tumours, it is found, upon dissection, that
they are merely small branches from the neighbouring cellular tissues ;
this, then, is what I name the simple chronic tumour of the breast. It
now and then occurs that the breast, as well as other parts of the body,
is attacked by Adipose Tumours , and some of them have been known
to acquire enormous dimensions. I have myself removed one from the
breast of a woman which weighed fourteen pounds ten ounces. This is
the tumour (the professor here put his hand upon a preparation which
stood upon the table before him), and although it may appear to you an
operation of a most formidable nature, yet it was not so ; there was no
risk attending it, and the only peculiarity which existed was, that the
veins were much larger than in ordinary tumours of the breast.

The next tumour which I shall describe is very common in young
people, and I have called it

THE IRRITABLE TUMOUR OF THE BREAST.

Like the simple chronic tumour, it generally occurs in persons from
fifteen to twenty-five years of age. These young persons are of san-
guineous temperament, and often of lovely aspect. The parents, in this
case, like the former, show the greatest solicitude for their daughter’s
welfare, and anxiously inquire of you if the disease be not cancerous ?
You endeavour to soothe their minds by representing to them its harm-
less, inoffensive nature, at the same time telling them that cancer does
not attack individuals so young or so healthy as their daughter. Upon
the breast being bared, and upon examining it, the moment you touch
the tumour you will find that the patient will instantly shrink from
you, and will be so alive to the most trifling pain, that she may be
compared to a sensitive plant. If you examine the tumour otherwise
than with gentleness, she will experience pain for hours, and even days



352



ON DISEASES OF THE BREAST.



afterwards, so exquisitely tender is this irritable swelling. Although it
is painful in common, yet the tenderness and pain immediately before
the period of menstruating are almost incredible; the pain extends from
the breast to the arm on the affected side, and down to the fingers’ ends,
and has even been known to affect the sight. There is no necessity for alarm
in these cases; the cause of the disease is easily ascertained : it merely
arises from functional derangement. There is no visceral disorganiza-
tion, and to afford relief, you have merely to adopt such measures as
are calculated to restore to its proper quantity and condition the uterine
secretion.

It has happened that some practitioners have removed a great portion
of the glandular part of the breast on account of these irritable swellings.
Such operations are not only unnecessary, but highly improper, as it is
impossible that they can prove of any service, for the irritable breast is
sure to return unless the menstrual discharge be restored to its natural
state ; to accomplish this, the best medicine you can administer is
misturi ferri composita, an ounce and a half of it two or three times a
day ; or from two to five grains of the ferrum ammoniatum, two or
three times a day, and from this combination of ammonia and steel I
have seen the greatest possible benefit result to the patient. As the
uterine discharge increases, the irritation in the breast lessens, and will
soon completely disappear.

Several surgeons are in the habit of applying leeches to breasts thus
affected ; whether they prove advantageous or not, I think, is exceed-
ingly equivocal, for by diminishing the strength, it is possible they
may prove highly injurious. Be particularly upon your guard against
operating for the removal of these irritable swellings ; such operations
will prove hurtful to your reputation. Rather attempt to cure the
disease by restoring to its proper quantity the uterine secretion ; the
irritable tumours of the breast are so common, that you will not
have been in practice six months without having met with several such
cases.



OF CARCINOMA IN THE NIPPLE OF MAN.

The nipple of men is sometimes affected with cancerous ulceration,
similar to the breasts of women : it begins in the same way, in the form
of the scirrhous tubercle ; here, however, it is generally in the imme-
diate neighbourhood of the nipple. An incrustation forms on the
surface of the nipple ; this drops off, another succeeds it, and another
to that again, until an ulcer is produced, and ultimately the whole
nipple is destroyed ; then the glands in the axilla, apd likewise those
above the clavicle, become diseased ; and men die from this complaint



ON DISEASES OF THE BREAST.



353



precisely in the same manner as women do from cancerous breasts. In
this disease the chance of success from an operation depends upon its
being performed before the axillary glands become diseased ; if those
glands are diseased, you should not then employ the knife ; the result
of two cases, which I saw some years ago, fully convinced me of the
propriety of what I am now telling you. In both those cases the glands
in the axilla had partaken of the diseased action, and the disease ap-
peared there with as much violence as ever, after it had been removed
from the breast. The medicines which are used for the carcinoma in
the female may also be employed here.

Tumours occasionally exist around the areola of children, from seven
to twelve years of age. I do not know whether they have ever been
described or named by authors, but I have always called them the
Areola Tumour ; they generally appear between the age of seven and
nine ; but I have seen them in children as far advanced as twelve years
of age. Upon examining the breast, you will find a swelling as large
as a half-crown, just round the areola ; flattened towards the outer
edge, but convex in the centre, that is, the nipple, which die swelling
closely surrounds.

Boys as well as girls are subject to this disease ; but I never saw
either afflicted with it after the age of puberty, nor anterior to the age
of seven.

The mode to adopt for their cure is to apply the emplast. ammon. c.
hydrarg., having a hole in its centre, for the reception of the nipple ;
this plaster will generally succeed in effecting a cure in the space of six

months: it should be occasionally changed or renewed say about

every eight or ten days. At the same time that you are using the
plaster, you should give to the patient the eighth or sixteenth of a grain
of the oxymur. hydrarg. in 3 i. of tinct. cinchon. bis. die. Or if the
bowels should be disordered, you may substitute for the tinct. cinchon.
~i. tinct. rhei. The plaster constantly used, and these medicines
occasionally taken, you will generally find, in the course of six months,
that the complaint has been subdued. I have known it cured as early
as the third month from the commencement of this treatment.

OF THE LACTEAL TUMOUR.

\\ omen, shortly alter their confinement, are frequently annoyed by
these tumours. A female will come to you with an immense swelling
on the breast, and, upon examining it with your hand, you readily
perceive a sense of fluctuation ; this leads you to believe that it is
chronic abscess ; but you will find no sign of inflammation, nor any
inconvenience from pain. With a lancet you open the sac, and there

H II 2



354



ON RETENTION OF URINE.



will be discharged a considerable quantity of milk ; the sac is filled by
it only ; and if the milk be put by for twenty-four hours its surface
will be covered with cream. After the milk has been evacuated, you
Should introduce into the opening made by the lancet, a sponge or
cotton tent; this, in a short time, will excite inflammation in the sides
of the sac ; adhesive matter will be thrown out, which, gluing the
parietes of the sac to each other, will be the means of gradually oblite-
rating the cavity, and thus produce a permanent cure. This treatment
is effectual in relieving such cases ; it is the best that I am acquainted
with, and I have seen it most decidedly successful in at least a dozen
instances.



LECTURE XLV.

ON RETENTION OF URINE.

It is not my intention to enter at any length into the causes which
produce retention of urine ; for this part of the subject I shall leave
until I describe to you the venereal disease, which I shall shortly have
occasion to do. I shall at present merely state, that the most frequent
causes of retention of urine, are strictures in the urethra, and enlarge-
ment of the prostate gland. There are several other causes, which give
rise to this state ; an accumulation of blood in the bladder ; stones in
the urethra, or the pressure of matter between the prostate gland and
the rectum, will sometimes occasion a necessity for opening the bladder.
In the female, the most frequent cause of retention of urine is, retrover-
sion of the uterus. I have also seen a cancerous disease in the vagina,
dosing the meatus urinarius, and thus rendering it necessary to punc-
ture the bladder. Before I speak more particularly of the means which
surgeons recommend for relieving retention of urine by the knife, I will
first show you the method of introducing the catheter into the bladder.
No man should think of performing any operation by puncturing the
bladder, or in any other way, without first endeavouring to relieve the
patient by the introduction of the catheter. The form and size of the
catheter are subject to some variation ; that which is used for stricture
in the urethra differs materially from that which is required in cases of
enlargement of the prostate gland. The prostate catheter, if I may so
call it, should be two inches longer than the common catheter ; and the
curve is considerably greater than that of the catheter for strictures in
the urethra. The latter is, indeed, generally too much curved ; the
curve should be, as nearly as possible, like the natural curve of the
urethra. The catheter is not only used for the purpose of drawing oft’
the water, but it is often employed as a bougie ; indeed, I commonly use



ON RETENTION OF URINE.



355



the common catheter, as I shall hereafter have occasion to state to you,
for the purpose of dilating strictures in the urethra, and, consequently,
rendering any other operation unnecessary. When you are called upon
to introduce a catheter, place yourself upon the right side of the patient,
pass it down under the arch of the pubes perpendicularly, until you
reach the membranous part of the urethra ; and then do not continue
to pass the instrument in that direction, for if you do, you will push it
towards the rectum instead of entering the bladder; but having reached
the membranous part of the urethra, you have only to move your hand
thus (showing the motion), and the instrument will immediately enter
the bladder. This is the whole secret of passing a catheter ; you have
only to bear in mind the two motions which are necessary to effect your
purpose, for if you continue to press the catheter onwards, when you
have reached the membranous portion of the urethra, you will press the
point of the instrument upon the rectum instead of introducing it into
the bladder. In cases of enlargement of the prostate gland, there will
be some difference in the mode of passing the catheter ; and it is a dif-
ference which it is somewhat difficult to explain. When the prostate is
enlarged, the urethra is pushed forward so as to be doubled on the point
of the instrument. You must, in this case, pass the catheter down to
the apex of the prostate gland, then carry the instrument towards the
abdomen, as to push the urethra as much as you can towards the peri-
naeum, and then having brought the urethra into a straight line again,
depress the point of the instrument, and you will be enabled to pass it
into the bladder. (The learned professor proceeded to show the method
of passing the catheter on the dead subject.) I certainly do hold that
it is the fault of the surgeon, if the bladder is ever tapped for enlarge-
ment of the prostate gland : whenever such an operation is performed
for this disease, it arises entirely from the surgeon’s want of knowledge
and adroitness ; for any man may readily pass an instrument into the
bladder in these cases, if he understands the formation of the parts, and
has been in the habit of introducing instruments into the bladder. I
have now for many years been engaged in the practice of these hospitals,
and I have seen something of the private practice of London, and I can
assure you that I have never yet seen a case of enlarged prostate, either
in these hospitals or in my private practice, in which it was necessary
to puncture the bladder. I know that it has been done repeatedly ; but
if the surgeon is sufficiently adroit, it is never necessary. There are
cases of stricture in the urethra, in which an operation for relieving the
bladder of an accumulated load of urine is rendered necessary. Let us
consider the means which different surgeons have proposed for this pur-



356



ON PUNCTURING THE BLADDER.



pose: and first let me observe to you that the bladder has not unfre-
quently been punctured above the pubes.

THE OPERATION OF PUNCTURING THE BLADDER ABOVE THE

PUBES.

This operation is founded on the following anatomical circum-
stances : — In the natural formation of the parts, the peritoneum falls
from the inner side of the rectus, over the upper part of the bladder,
and is reflected backward to the fundus, leaving a space filled with cel-
lular tissue between the pubes and the reflected peritoneum. This is
the space in which the surgeon performs the operation ; but when the
bladder is excessively distended with urine, it will sometimes happen,
that it reaches as far as the navel, occupying a great part of the anterior
portion of the abdomen. An instance of this may be seen in a cast
taken by Mr. Solly, from a case which was brought a few days ago into
the museum. (The learned professor exhibited the cast to the class).
The peritoneum is not within the reach of the pubes, but is three inches
removed from it ; consequently, it is reflected over the bladder, and a
large space is left for the operation between the reflected peritoneum
and the pubes. Your object in performing the operation is, to avoid
wounding the peritoneum, which is in the highest degree dangerous.
Cases have occurred, in which the peritoneum has been punctured, and
yet the patient has survived ; but such a circumstance could only arise
from the unskilfulness of the surgeon. The operation of puncturing
the bladder above the pubes is one of the most simple and easy ; it re-
quires very little anatomical knowledge, and very little adroitness on
the part of the surgeon who performs it. All that is required is this —
make your incision through the integuments to the extent of an inch
above the pubes. It is best to open the integuments in the first instance,
because the trocar will afterwards enter the bladder with more ease, and
because, if there should be any extravasation of urine by the side of the
instrument, it will more rapidly escape. The incision should extend as
far as the linea alba ; with respect to the direction in which the trocar
is to be passed, you must not, on any account, direct the point of the
trocar downwards towards the anus, but obliquely from the penis to the
back of the pelvis, just towards the basis of the sacrum. The trocar
and canula being introduced, the water passes through the canula ; an
elastic gum catheter should be introduced through the canula, and left
in the bladder. It is better not to leave a silver canula in the bladder
for any length of time, because it is liable to uleferate the posterior part
of the bladder. Sharpe objected to the operation above the pubes on



ON PUNCTURING THE BLADDER.



357



that ground ; but this objection is removed by the substitution of an
elastic gum catheter. There was another objection taken by Sharpe to
this operation. He found that the urine was extravasated between the
bladder and the posterior surface of the abdominal muscles, and accu-
mulating in the cellular tissue, produced large abscesses, occasioning
a high degree of irritation, and often destruction of life. This danger
may be prevented by using an elastic gum catheter with a plug, by
which the urine may be occasionally withdrawn, or a bladder attached
to its extremity, into which the urine may distil. The catheter may be
left in the bladder for a great length of time without producing any in-
jurious consequences.

A man was tapped in the bladder in a situation which is not usual,
the linea semilunaris ; and a female catheter was introduced into it, and
worn upwards of twelve months. The operation was performed by
Mr. Hare, a surgeon in Essex. I saw this patient twelve months after
the operation had been performed ; he had then the female catheter in
his bladder. I removed this catheter, and succeeded in introducing a
common one into the bladder through the urethra, with much difficulty,
for he had a very bad stricture. In a short time he passed his urine
freely by the natural course. I have seen some cases in which the
bladder has been punctured above the pubes, where the patient has
drawn off his water at pleasure, by turning a little silver cock. A
professor at Edinburgh, who underwent this operation, wore a tube in
his bladder for some years after, by which he drew off his water at
pleasure. A few days ago, I saw Mr. Copeland Hutchison perform
the operation of puncturing the bladder above the symphysis pubis, for
an accumulation of blood in the bladder, which prevented the urine
from passing by the urethra. The operation is very easily performed ;
it is not liable to the objections which were formerly made to it, and it
is in general safe. In the female, it is absolutely necessary that this
operation should be performed in cases of retention of urine, from re-
troversio uteri, and from a cancerous disease affecting the meatus uri-
narius. Opening the bladder by the vagina is a very unsafe and dis-
astrous operation in its consequences ; as the urine distils into the va-
gina, occasioning the highest degree of excoriation, attended with
dreadful suffering and constitutional irritation. It is an operation
which ought never to be performed.

The next operation which I shall describe to you is that of

PUNCTURING THE BLADDER BY THE RECTUM.

I must recall to your minds a little of the anatomy of the parts ; you
remember that the prostate gland bounds the bladder at the under part,



358



ON PUNCTURING THE BLADDER.



that directly behind it the vasa deferentia meet, and pass down at an
acute angle, the sides so nearly approaching where they first touch
the prostate gland, that there is no room for the introduction of an in.
strument without injuring either one or the other of these tubes. The
vesiculse seminales which are situated on the outer side of the vasa defe-
rentia are not in danger from the operation. There is a triangular space
behind the prostate gland, which affords room for the instrument ; and
how is this space bounded ? In the fore part it is bounded by the
meeting of the vasa deferentia, which forms the apex of the triangle ;
the sides of the triangle are formed by the vasa deferentia, which di-
verge from each other, passing from the prostate gland backwards ; the
basis of the triangle is formed by the peritoneum, which is reflected
from the posterior part of the bladder to the upper part of the rectum.
Taking advantage of this space of the bladder which is not covered by
peritoueum, you pass the instrument which you employ for the purpose
of relieving the bladder, about three-quarters of an inch behind the
prostate gland, into the back of the bladder. You must not pass it
directly behind the prostate, for if you do, you will castrate the patient
either on one side or on the other, as the vasa deferentia are situated
close at the basis of the prostate gland. If you carry the instrument
three-quarters of an inch, or even half an inch, behind the prostate
gland, the vasa deferentia will escape. No man should think of intro-
ducing the trocar directly behind the prostate gland, but at the distance
of at least half an ijfch from it : the distance of three-quarters of an
inch is better. When you pass your finger into the rectum you will
feel the bladder projecting into it. It is elastic, and yields with diffi-
culty to the pressure of the finger ; you will readily feel the fluctuation.
This leads you to the spot where the trocar is to be introduced; the
triangular space is dife^tly presented to the point of the instrument.
This is a very easy operation, and may be had recourse to by a surgeon
who consults his own ease rather than the advantage of his patient. I
will describe to you the steps of the operation, and then mention the
objections which may be urged against it. You introduce your finger
about an inch behind the prostate gland, and then upon the upper part
of the finger pass the trocar, which may be either curved or straight,
to the posterior part of the bladder. When the point of the instrument
rests upon the upper part of the rectum and the posterior part of the
bladder, you pass the trocar into the bladder by a slight and sudden
motion of the hand. As to the direction in which the trocar is to be
carried, it is obliquely upwards and forward. If you were to push it
through die fore part of the abdominal parietes, it would pass midway
between the pubes and the navel. The place at which the point of the



ON PUNCTURING THE BLADDER.



359



instrument should penetrate, supposing it to be carried through the
bladder, is half-way between the umbilicus and the symphysis pubis.
In this direction it will readily enter the bladder. The objections to
an operation which is so easily performed are these : Although you in-
troduce an elastic gum catheter for the purpose of allowing the urine to
distil through it, some of it will trickle by the side of the instrument
into the rectum, and produce a high degree of irritation. This is not
the case in every instance ; but I have seen a great number of instances
in which the rectum has been brought into a state of severe disease in
consequence of this operation. Mr. C., a surgeon of Gloucester, had a
patient under his care for more than two years, who suffered from a high
degree of irritation in the rectum after this operation, a sinus having
formed between the bladder and the rectum ; he died from the conse-
quences of this disease. This is an objection which may be urged
against puncturing the bladder in this way ; and though the operation
sometimes succeeds, it is, upon the whole, one which ought not to be
resorted to. I went down into the country, some years ago, to see an
elderly gentleman who was labouring under retention of urine. When
I arrived, the surgeon told me that he had relieved his patient by punc-
turing the bladder through the rectum ; I said I was happy to find that
his patient was relieved, and was about to go back, when he requested
me to see his patient. I went into the room, where I saw a very old
gentleman, and upon asking him how he felt, he told me that he was
greatly relieved by the operation which had been performed. I asked
the surgeon the cause of the retention of urine, and for which he had
punctured this gentleman’s bladder ; and he replied, an enlargement of
the prostate gland. Indeed, said I, let me see whether I can pass a
catheter into this gentleman’s bladder. I took a large catheter from my
pocket, which I passed with the greatest ease. It was this, and a great
number of similar cases, which induced me to say that it is perfectly
unnecessary to puncture the bladder by the rectum, or in any other way,
for an enlargement of the prostate gland. You may rely upon it that
any surgeon who punctures the bladder, under such circumstances, is
a particularly clumsy fellow. (A laugh.)

(The learned professor proceeded to show the operation of puncturing
the bladder by the rectum on the dead subject.)

OF THE OPERATION OF PUNCTURING THE BLADDER THROUGH
THE PERINEUM.

This is so much like the operation for stone that I need not dwell
much upon it. It consists in puncturing the bladder by the side of the
prostate gland : there is no danger of injuring the peritoneum in this



360



ON PUNCTURING THE BLADDER.

operation, because it does not reach the anterior part of the bladder.
\ ou make an incision in perinaeo, as in the operation for stone, cutting
down on the bulb of the penis, and drawing it to the patient’s right
side. You then carry the knife within the branch of the ischium till it
reaches the prostate gland, which you push to the patient’s right side.
You then carry the instrument obliquely upwards into the bladder,
your finger resting on the prostate gland. (Sir Astley performed the
operation on the dead subject.)

There is no great difficulty in any of these operations, but let us now
come to this question, whether the bladder should be punctured at all ?
The last operation requires a greater share of anatomical knowledge
than the others ; this is of course no objection to it, for no man ought
to operate on the human body who has not a perfect knowledge of ana-
tomy. The objection to it is, that it generally produces a great deal of
constitutional irritation, which we ought always, if possible, to avoid.
I hold that we ought to avoid all these operations, and that puncturing
the bladder at all for stricture in the urethra, or enlargement of the
prostate gland, is perfectly unnecessary. I will tell you why I hold
this opinion, gentlemen ; for if I were to make this statement without
assigning my reason for it, I should be doing you injustice. I am aware
that what I now say is not merely addressed to you, but that it will go
forth to the world, and I have no hesitation in declaring my opinion, how-
ever widely that opinion may be disseminated, that I consider the opera-
tion of puncturing the bladder, with very few exceptions, entirely unneces-
sary. I will explain to you the grounds on which I entertain this opinion.
I was lecturing here one evening, when one of Mr. Chandler’s dressers
came to me, and requested me to see a man who was labouring under
retention of urine in this hospital. I went immediately, and found that
he was suffering under retention of urine, from the use of a caustic
bougie. I desired him to try to make water, and while he was trying
I put my finger on the perinaeum, and distinctly felt the water rush
against the stricture, which was just opposite the arch of the pubes,
the urethra having become enlarged behind the stricture. I directed
him to be carried into the operating theatre, and just making an inci-
sion under the symphysis pubis, I desired him to try to make water.
While he was trying, the urethra being very much distended with urine,

I opened it, and the urine flowed. He was put to bed without under-
going any other operation ; the inflammation produced by the caustic
bougie subsided, and common bougies were afterwards used. The man
was completely relieved by the operation, and this is all I have done
since in cases of accumulation of urine in the bladder. I desire the
patient to draw up his legs as if he was going to be operated upon for



ON PUNCTURING THE BLADDER.



361



stone, and I tell him that I am just going to make a small incision,
which will not expose him to any risk. If I find a difficulty, on account
of the stricture being situated very near the apex of the prostate gland,
on opening the urethra I introduce an instrument in the way in which
many of you saw me perform the operation a few days ago. Instead of
carrying the point of the instrument towards the-bladder, I direct it
outwards, so as to bring the urethra into the perinaeum, and making a
cut behind the point of the instrument, I introduce a probe and carry it
to the stricture. If the incision is not sufficient, I carry the opening
still further, introduce a director, and upon it a knife, with. which I
divide the membranous portion of the urethra. The result is, that the
urine is passed by the perinaeum, and the bladder is relieved from the
accumulated load of urine without being in the slightest degree injured.
It is said that this is an operation attended with great difficulty. I will
acknowledge that there is some difficulty in it, if a man is not quite
clear as to the situation of the different parts of the urethra ; but this is
what every surgeon ought to be perfectly acquainted with. Suppose I
wished to cut into the membranous portion of the urethra, where should
I make the incison so as to be quite sure of cutting at once into it, even
without the introduction of a staff ? — directly under the symphysis pubis.
A few days ago I had occasion to perform the operation which I am
new describing. In going round the wards I was told that there was a
man with a very bad stricture ; I desired that he might be carried into
the theatre. I found it impossible to introduce an instrument into his
bladder ; I consequently made an incision on the stricture. This inci-
sion led to the discovery of some very solid bodies, which proved to be
two calculi directly behind the stricture. I first introduced a probe,
and then a director, which I passed into the bladder. In order to
overcome the stricture, I did not divide it with the knife, but passing a
catheter down to the stricture, I forced the stricture with the catheter,
carried the instrument on through the wound into the bladder, and left
it there. Now was this man’s life endangered by this operation ? Was
he less likely to recover ? See him gentlemen, and judge for yourselves;
he was completely relieved by the operation, and he is now doing
extremely well. It may be supposed that this operation is a little
bantling of my own, and that I am therefore desirous that others should
favour it. No, gentlemen, these are not my sentiments. I am anxious
only that you should adopt that operation which is best calculated for
the patient’s safety, and your own reputation. If you can relieve a
patient from an accumulated load of urine, by an operation which leaves
his bladder in a sound state, I certainly think you should prefer that ope-
ration. Some, at least, of the surgeons of these hospitals concur with



362



ON DROPSY OF THE ABDOMEN.



me in this opinion. Mr. Green and Mr. Key have performed this
operation repeatedly. The other day, indeed, when the man was placed
on the table, and I hesitated whether I should puncture the bladder
above the pubes for I think it right occasionally to vary our operations,
for the benefit of the students, where it can be done with safety to the
patient, Mr. Key interposed, and said to me, “ Oh, no ! do not quit
your operation, of opening the urethra.” This is certainly the ope-
ration which I advise you to perforin ; and if you feel any difficulty in
performing it, go, gentlemen, to the dissecting room, and study till you
have surmounted that difficulty.

The learned professor concluded, by showing on the dead subject, the
mode of extracting small stones from the bladder, without the use of
cutting instruments. He exhibited to the class the forceps invented for
this purpose, at his own suggestion, by Mr. Weiss, of the Strand, to
whose ingenuity and skill he paid a well merited tribute. With this
instrument, Sir Astley extracted no fewer than eighty-four calculi from
the bladder of the Rev. Mr. — , of Barnwell, in Cambridgeshire. He
had since extracted thirty calculi from another person. Some years
since he performed the operation of lithotomy on a young man at
Wapping. A few months ago this person called upon him, and said
that he was sure he had a stone in his bladder. The learned professor
said that if it was a small one he could extract it from him without
cutting, and he succeeded in immediately extracting a stone from the
bladder. The same patient called again upon him shortly after, and
said he was convinced there was another stone in his bladder. No stone
could be found, but the forceps were expanded on being withdrawn, so
as to stretch the passage. The patient was recommended to resist the
inclination to make water for a considerable time; and the first time he
made water he passed three or four small calculi. Sir Astley observed,
that by regulating the screw of this instrument, so as to increase its
force, even large triple phosphates might be broken and removed from
the bladder.



LECTURE XLVI.

ON DROPSY OF THE ABDOMEN.

These are two species of this Dropsy, viz., Peritoneal or Ascites, and
the Encysted or Ovarian. The Peritoneal Dropsy is an accumulation
of water in the cavity of the peritoneum, and the Ovarian Dropsy is a
collection of water in the membrane which covers the ovarium : first,
then, of



ON ASCITES, OR PERITONEAL DROPSY.



3ti3



ASCITES, OR PERITONEAL DROPSY.

The first symptom which a person feels who is affected with ascites,
is pain on the abdomen being pressed; every day this symptom
becomes more and more severe, until even the clothes, if ever so loosely
worn, will feel too tight on the body and the person will be desirous of
having them removed. Well, the body goes on gradually enlarging,
until, at length, the person applies for medical advice. Upon exami-
nation, it will be found that the intestines are floating in a fluid, the
abdomen enlarged, (in proportion, of course, to the quantity of fluid
within,) and upon loosening the clothes, applying a hand to each side
of the body, and gently using pressure with one hand and slightly
tapping the abdomen with the other, or giving the body a gentle sudden
jerk from side to side, fluctuation will be readily perceived. As the
secretion of water increases, the abdomen becomes more tense, pressure
is produced on the diaphragm, which occasions a difficulty of breath-
ing, which is more especially felt in the hurry of exercise, so that
dyspncea at length becomes a very distressing symptom, arising from the
accumulation of water in the abdomen, until it reaches the lower part of
the diaphragm, in consequence of which the contraction of that muscle
becomes necessarily impeded, and the difficulty of breathing thereby
produced. As the abdomen increases, fluctuation may, as I before
stated to you, be easily distinguished, by applying your hand to one
side of the body, and by gently tapping the opposite side with the other,
the undulations of the water will be readily felt by the fingers which are
pressing on the abdomen : thus, then, the fluid being so readily felt,
and the symptoms so manifest, viz. : —

The difficulty of breathing, the great increase of that quickness, on
taking exercise, the inconvenience arising from the slightest pressure by
the clothes, and the gradual enlargement of the abdomen, so strongly
pointing out the true character of the disease, it is hardly possible you
can form an incorrect opinion respecting it.

The quantity of water usually drawn from individuals affected with
ascites, is from twenty-five to thirty pints ; in this respect, however, as
you may suppose, there is considerable variation, but the quantity a
surgeon expects who has performed the operation of tapping on many
persons, is what I have just stated to you; and from twenty-five to
thirty pints, the first time the operation is performed, will be the quan-
tity generally drawn off.

The fluid secreted in ascites is serous, but does not contain so much
albumen as serum in general : when ascites is present, and inflamma-
tion of the abdomen follows, it will occasionally happen that so large a



364 ON ASCITES, OR PERITONEAL DROPSY.

quantity of adhesive matter will escape from the vessels as to mix witli
the serum, and cause it readily to coagulate, by the addition of the
mineral acids or alcohol ; but such a quantity of adhesive matter as
produces this effect is not often met with. The fluid, therefore, found
in ascites, is more of a watery nature, having in its composition less
albumen than serum in general.

THE CAUSES OF ASCITES.

The most common cause of ascites is disease of the liver : in this pe-
riod of our session it would be impertinent in me to describe to you the
anatomy of this part ; you will, therefore, readily understand me when
I say, that diseases of the liver, by impeding the circulation of the
blood through that organ, by obstructing its free passage, must, of ne-
cessity, occasion a congestion of blood in the vessels of the mesentery,
stomach, spleen, pancreas, and neighbouring parts ; and for the relief of
this congestion, nature is under the necessity of effusing, from the filled
vessels, the serum which we subsequently find in the bag of the
peritoneum.

But besides this common cause of ascites, arising from the mechanical
obstruction of re’turn to the blood, there is another cause which very fre-
quently produces the disease, viz., enlargement of the abdominal vis-
cera ; say the spleen, for example ; from its enlargement, it presses
upon and irritates the peritoneum ; a greater quantity of blood than
usual is then determined to the part with a view of getting rid of the
irritation, which, however, still continuing, the serum becomes secreted
so profusely, as to produce the disease of which I am now speaking ; so
that although the two causes I have mentioned are widely different in
principle, yet in effect they are precisely similar.

In the first it is produced through mechanical obstruction ; whereas,
in the last, it is the result of local irritation ; besides the causes just
named, there are others which produce it; the most common is the de-
bility arising from fever. Mercury likewise will give rise to it, if ad-
ministered in such quantities as to exceed or overcome the powers of the
body in debilitated constitutions ; the two last mentioned causes are fa-
vourable ones, and ascites is frequently cured when occasioned by them.

A young man had the operation of paracentesis performed for ascites
which had been produced by mercury ; three quarts of water were eva-
cuated ; this young man recovered. I do not mention it as an extraor-
dinary case, either to show that mercury will produce dropsy, or that his
recovery from ascites was extraordinary ; but to point out to you the
impropriety of tapping a person at so early a period of the disease, when
the operation is attended with hazard, from the danger you run of



ON ASCITES, OR PERITONEAL DROPSY. 365

wounding the viscera; I do not consider a surgeon justified in perform-
ing the operation of paracentesis, when the collection of water is so
small, as in this case, and more especially as ascites, when caused by
debility, arising either from fever or mercury, is so generally and readily
remediable by medical treatment.

Diseases of the heart, lungs, and other organs, will likewise produce
ascites, but when it results from affections of the two first mentioned
organs, the disease is scarcely ever ascites alone, but is generally com-
bined with hydrothorax ; it is very, very rare to see ascites as the effect
of disease of the heart or lungs, without its being at the same time
accompanied by hydrothorax.

Treatment. — Now, gentlemen, medical treatment, when judiciously
pursued, is very often successful in the cure of ascites: in the use of
medicines, however, you must take care to direct their influence against
the cause of ascites ; therefore, if the liver is the defective organ, you
should endeavour to restore its healthy functions, and in this attempt
your efforts will frequently be crowned with success, unless the dis-
ease has existed so long a time as completely to have broken up the
constitution.

When the disease is occasioned by local irritation, arising, for exam-
ple, from enlargement of the spleen, you will then find great difficulty
in performing a cure ; but, gentlemen, it is not so in dropsy, arising
from debility, independent of disorganization. I again repeat to you,
that ascites thus occasioned can be easily cured by medical means.

Those who indulge in the use of ardent spirits are likewise often
affected with dropsy of the abdomen ; the spirits heat and stimulate the
stomach, liver, duodenum, and neighbouring parts, and act upon the
same principle, and produce the same result, as the irritation arising from
an enlarged spleen ; they occasion a great determination of blood to the
parts, and an increased secretion of fluid. Upon the employment of
medicine and an abandonment of the pernicious habit of spirit-drinking,
this disease may readily be overcome, and in that respect it differs
widely from ascites arising from enlargement of the viscera, occasioning
local irritation. If the patient will but forego the use of spirits and live
temperately, the disease may be cured ; and so may dropsy which is
produced by debility, after fevers. When, however, the disease is a
consequence of disorganization, your remedies may probably fail, for
the malady is then caused by other complaints, over which medicines
have no power.



i i 2



366 ON ASCITES, OR PERITONEAL DROPSY.



MEDICAL REMEDIES TO BE EMPLOYED IN ASCITES, OR DnOPSY
OF THE ABDOSIEN.

The medicines which experience has proved to be the most beneficial
in dropsy of the abdomen, are calomel and squills ; one grain of calo-
mel, and three of squills, in a pill, or two grains of blue pill combined
witli three grains of squills ; one of these should be administered every
night, or every other night, and in the day you should give a mixture,
composed of from seven to ten grains of carbonate of ammonia, one
drachm of spiritus aetheris nitrosi, twenty drops of tinctura digitalis,
and an ounce and a half of mistura camphor®. This medicine, given
once or twice a-day, with one of the above pills at night, will often suc-
ceed in restoring a person to health, whose constitution may be consi-
dered so broken and faulty, that it may be deemed impossible for him
ever to regain a sound state of body. Should the dropsy have arisen
from the irritation caused by ardent spirits, these must be relinquished,
or the complaint will not disappear. There are other medicines which
are powerful in producing an absorption of effused water, and carrying
it off by the kidneys and by stool ; the most active of these is elaterium ;
it is, indeed, so active, so severe in its effects, so destructive, that you
must never give it to persons of advanced years, nor to those who
labour under great debility. In dropsy, however, which occurs in the
middle of life, where there is strength to bear its operation, this me-
dicine will be found a most valuable remedy. Much caution must
be exercised when you are giving it, for it is so violently drastic, that a
large dose given at once may prove destructive to life; you should,
therefore, as it were, feel your way with it, by giving at first small
doses, and carefully ascertaining what quantity the patient’s constitu-
tion will bear. In the hands of a judicious practitioner, this medi-
cine will be found truly valuable; it must, however, be exhibited
to those only who have strength, and in no instance to the aged
and infirm, unless in exceedingly small doses. An operation, called
paracentesis, or tapping, is occasionally performed for the purpose
of relieving ascites, and this operation every now and then succeeds in
removing the disease ; this happy result can only occur in such cases
where the disease lias been the effect of debility, arising from some kind
of fever, or from the abuse of mercury. If the operation should not cure,
it will tend materially to diminish the sufferings of the patients, by re-
lieving the load under which they labour, and by removing, in great
measure, the difficulty of breathing, caused by the water accumulating
to such an extent as to press upon the lower surface of the diaphragm ;



OVARIAN, OR ENCYSTED DROPSY.



367



the removal of the water under these circumstances will likewise afford a
better opportunity for the trial of medicines ; this operation has also pro-
duced a permanent cure, when such a result was totally unexpected on
the part of the medical practitioner. I recollect the case of a young
man at Guy’s, who had recovered from typhus, but who had afterwards
an accumulation of water in the abdomen, on which account I was re-
quested to see him by the late Dr. Marcet. He had anasarca as well as
ascites ; I tapped his abdomen for the ascites, and punctured the lower
part of the abdomen and insides of the thighs, for the anasarca. This
young man was in an exceedingly weak state, and I did not imagine he
would have recovered. I met Dr. Marcet three weeks afterwards, who
asked me what I thought had become of the patient whom I had tapped ?
I replied that I did not know ; probably, I said, he has died. “ No,”
said Dr. Marcet, “ he is perfectly cured, and if you like you can see
him.” This, gentlemen, was a most fortunate case, but the greatest
misfortune is, that such cures seldom occur.

The next subject on which I shall speak is the

OVARIAN, OR ENCYSTED DROPSY.

One of the principal differences that exists between this and the
former disease is, that the ovarian dropsy is entirely local : a person
may be attacked by it who is in perfect health ; indeed the health of
the female may be as good when she has this disease as a man’s may be
when he has hydrocele, and these diseases are somewhat similar, both
having a local origin.

After the encysted dropsy has existed for a short time, a small tu-
mour v/ill be perceived just above Poupart’s ligament, lying upon the
brim of the pelvis, in the hollow formed by the iliacus internus muscle ;
no fluctuation can be perceived in it at first ; as it increases, it gradually
rises as high as the kidney of the affected side, it then crosses the abdo-
men, and fills the opposite side ; it thus forms on one side, grows to a
considerable size, then passes to the opposite side, and thus becomes of
very considerable magnitude. There is no pain in the progress of the
complaint, and the principal inconvenience that arises from it, when the
tumour is situated in the pelvis, is its pressing upon the bladder, and
interrupting the free flow of urine.

It is necessary to have the abdomen very much distended, before
fluctuation can be perceived ; it is not by any means so distinct here in
its early stages as in ascites, and requires considerable time before the
fact can be correctly ascertained.

1 here is about the same quantity of water drawn out in ovarian dropsy
as in ascites, viz., from twenty-five to thirty pints, and when the swell-



368



OVARIAN, OR ENCYSTED DROPSY.



ing occupies both sides of the abdomen, you will not find much varia-
tion in these quantities.

You may form some idea of the size that they sometimes reach, by
this enormous bag (here the professor showed to the class an exceedingly
large, dried membranous cyst) ; this is the cyst of an ovarian dropsy,
and it contained ninety-seven pints of water, being twelve gallons and a
pint, and is not the largest that has been known. I have heard of their
containing above a hundred pints; and in one case, from between a hun-
dred and twenty to a hundred and thirty pints. The woman from whom
this cyst was taken, would not permit the operation of paracentesis to be
performed, and therefore, in all probability, lost her life through her
obstinacy ; she grew, as you may imagine, a most unwieldy figure,
and was obliged to be wheeled from place to place, not being capable of
exercise.

Now, gentlemen, it sometimes happens that the ovaries become
diseased, and grow to tumours of an immense size ; here is one which
was given to me two or three days since by Mr. Callaway ; you see of
what immense magnitude it is ; it weighs thirty-nine pounds some
ounces; it was removed after death from an elderly woman, but the
history of the case is unknown to me ; it is not of a malignant charac-
ter, and appears to be of the same nature as simple chronic tumour of
the breast.

The fluid contained in the cyst of ovarian dropsy differs considerably
in different subjects : in some being serous, in others mucilaginous, and
occasionally purulent. The fluid sometimes is so thick when mucila-
ginous, that it will not escape through a common-sized canula, and you
are under the necessity of introducing one of large diameter before you
can succeed in drawing it off.

I tapped a woman, in company with a surgeon in ( the city, and the
sac in that instance contained a fluid like pus; the practitioner who was
with me had found a similar discharge when he tapped her some months
previously. This woman recovered ; I have seen other cases of a simi-
lar description.

When you operate for ovarian dropsy, it is quite uncertain what kind
of fluid you will find ; sometimes the cyst is filled with a number of
hydatids ; you must not therefore be alarmed when you perform the
operation of paracentesis for the relief of this complaint, if a fluid should
escape different from what you expected.

Now, gentlemen, the cyst in which the water of ovarian dropsy is
contained is of two species — one is formed of the membrane which covers
the ovary, and the other from an hydatid which lodges upon that mem-
brane, the ovary itself being quite unaffected.



OVARIAN, OR ENCYSTED DROPSY. 369

Here, gentlemen (exhibiting the preparation to the class), is a speci-
men of dropsy of one of the fallopian tubes ; both extremities having
been closed, water collected between them, and thus the disease was
produced.



TREATMENT OF THE OVARIAN DROPSY.

I do not believe that medical treatment has any influence in this com-
plaint ; that is, I do not consider that medicines will produce any
marked difference in the quantity of fluid contained in the cyst of the
ovarian dropsy. Different practitioners, however, entertain different
opinions on this subject ; but, gentlemen, I feel it my duty to state,
candidly and openly to you, the result of my own experience.

You may, if you think proper, give digitalis and mercury ; they are
strongly recommended. — I will mention to you a case which will illus-
trate the influence, or rather the want of influence of mercury, in ova-
rian dropsy : — Dr. Baillie and myself once met in consultation on the
case of a lady who had for some time been afflicted with ovarian dropsy,
and who had taken such quantities of mercury as to occasion a slough-
ing of the gums, the insides of the cheeks ; and to excite so great a
degree of adhesive inflammation, as caused her lower jaw to become
fixed, and she was under the necessity of sucking her nutriment between
the teeth ; this proved what power mercury had over the disease. At
this consultation I mentioned to Dr. Baillie my astonishment, that
after so many cases of a similar description as the one we were then see-
ing, that practitioners should persist in asserting that mercury would
produce an absorption of the water of ovarian dropsy. I asked Dr.
Baillie if he had ever seen any benefit result from the employment of
medicine in this complaint ; and with that candour which is the strong-
est proof of an honourable mind, he answered, “ Not in my life-time.”

I do not wish, gentlemen, to deter you from the trial of medicine ;
but I am fully satisfied, after you have done so, you will agree with me
that it does not possess the least power of occasioning a diminution of
the water of encysted dropsy, and the reason of its being thus powerless
is the deficiency of absorbents attached to the cyst ; if you were to see
a cyst injected for the purpose of exhibiting the absorbents, you would
at once see the insuperable difficulty which is opposed to the successful
medical treatment of this complaint. Now if the cyst should burst, and
the water escape into the cavity of the abdomen, you know, in some in-
stances, that in three days it has been absorbed, and passed away by
urine and by the intestines. Again, in ascites, we know that elaterium
has, in a very short time, produced a complete absorption of the water,
but in ovarian dropsy no such effect has ever been known. Who would



370 OVARIAN, OR ENCYSTED DROPSY.

have supposed, upon looking at the peritoneum, that it was abetter ab-
sorbent surface than the ovarian cyst ; and who would have imagined
that squills, digitalis, or elaterium, would have had a greater effect
upon one than upon the other; yet the fact is well known, and the
cause of it clearly ascertained by anatomical inquiry ; on one are found
absorbents thickly distributed, while on the other they are scarcely
perceptible.

When a person consults you, having ovarian dropsy, you should
direct a belt to be applied tightly round the abdomen, for the purpose
of producing such a degree of pressure as "/ill diminish the tendency to
enlargement ; for if a person leads a sedentary life, and does not em-
ploy pressure, you will soon find that the dropsy will so increase as to
require an operation ; whereas if the belt be worn, tapping may be put
off almost to an indefinite period.

Whether medicines are taken or not with a view of promoting the
absorption of the water, I would advise you at least to attend to the
fecal discharges.

The operation of tapping has occasionally been performed with a view
of merely relieving the load under which the patient has suffered, when,
to the surprise of the practitioner, it has ended in a perfect cure ; but,
generally speaking, the vessels more commonly have a disposition to
renew the secretion of fluid, and the disease again forms.

When about to perform the operation for ovarian dropsy, take care
that you may not be misled, and perform your operation on a person in
a state of pregnancy. I have known several instances of this kind
occur ; it is a very awkward accident, would injure your reputation,
and you should always, therefore, previously make yourself acquainted
with the state of the parts, by an examination per vaginam. By ne-
glecting this precaution, difficulties and accidents connected with the
operation often arise. A gentleman from my native county was dining
with me one day, and in the course of conversation, asked me if I had
ever performed the operation of dry tapping ? “ Good God ! no (I re-

plied), and hope I never shall.” “ Well, (said he), it is an operation
that I have seen, at all events ; and I’ll relate to you the particulars.
A practitioner in the town where I resided called upon the surgeon with
whom I was a pupil, and told me and a fellow-student that he was going
to perform the operation of tapping for ovarian dropsy, and if we chose
we might go and see it ; we thanked him, and attended.

n The woman was seated on a stool, with her abdomen exposed, and
the surgeon plunged in the trocar and canula, when, upon holding up
a basin, and withdrawing the former, the doctor looked somewhat
amazed at finding that no water escaped, and after crying ‘ hum,’ and



371



OVARIAN, OR ENCYSTED DROPSY.

deliberating for a second or two, he withdrew the canula, refixed the
trocar in it, stepped back a pace or two, pointed it towards the abdomen,
and again charged it as with a bayonet. ( Much laughter). The
trocar was then withdrawn from the canula as before, but still no water !
At this he uttered ‘oh!’ instead of ‘hum,’ — paused, withdrew the
canula— turned to the persons present, and said, ‘ Gentlemen — this is
an operation which you have probably never seen before— it is that of
dry tapping;' and then to the attendant, ‘Nurse, you may do her up.’
(Excessive laughter ). — ‘ Faith,’ said the gentleman who told me the
story, ‘ we thought he had done her up.’ ”

A question has often been started by medical men, whether the ope-
ration should be performed early or late, and in reply, I say, never
early ; at this time the cyst does not adhere to the peritoneum ; conse-
quently, instead of your drawing the water off, it will escape into the
cavity of the abdomen. I knew an instance where a young woman was
operated upon in whom the cyst was very small ; while the water was
passing off, it suddenly stopped, upon which the surgeon introduced a
probe ; and upon withdrawing the probe, something came away with it,
which, upon examination, was found to be omentum. After the ope-
ration, peritoneal inflammation came on, and the young woman died.
Never operate, then, until the tumour has become fixed, and which fact
you can ascertain by carefully watching it in different positions of the
body. But there is another reason why the operation should not be
performed in the commencement of the disease, which is, the cyst at
that period consists of different compartments, divided by septa ; as the
disease advances, and as the cyst becomes larger, these septa are broken,
and the whole of the interior forms one cavity. Now, if you were to
operate before this had been effected, the end of the canula communi-
cating only with one part of the cyst, would merely draw the water from
thence, without abstracting it from other parts, and consequently, the
relief to the patient would be exceedingly partial.

It has been proposed, after evacuating the water from ovarian cysts,
to inject them in the same manner as we do the tunica vaginalis for the
radical cure of hydrocele. The experiment was tried more than a hun-
dred years since by a practitioner in Cornwall ; in the first case it com-
pletely succeeded, but, with a candour which did him infinite credit, he
acknowledged that in two subsequent instances it proved unsuccessful.
Probably it has not been sufficiently tried, and, for my own part, I
think the subject is really deserving consideration. The stimulant
employed should be mild, and must not approach the strength of the
injections used for hydrocele, composed as they are of a drachm of
sulphate of zinc to a pint of water, or equal parts of wine and water.



372



ON PARACENTESIS ABDOMINIS.



It is an operation which should rather be performed at the solicitation
of the patient than at your own recommendation. It has been proposed
to take away the cyst, and this I really think may be accomplished —
at least small cysts ; but large cysts, I feel confident, cannot be thus
removed. A gentleman, whom you all respect very much, tried the
experiment; after having made the opening through the muscles of the
abdomen, upon introducing his finger it was found that the sac so firmly
adhered to the abdominal parietes, that it was impossible to carry the
operation into effect.

LECTURE XLVII.

ON PARACENTESIS ABDOMINIS.

In the last lecture, gentlemen, I spoke of the operation for the relief of
dropsy of theabdomen, whether ascites or encysted dropsy : and in doing
so I recommended you not to attempt to perform the operation without
distinctly ascertaining a fluctuation, as you might otherwise endanger the
abdominal viscera. The operation itself is very simple ; the instru-
ments which you use for this purpose are either the trocar and canula,
or the lancet and canula. If it be ascites, the lancet and canula will
answer equally well with the trocar and canula, as the fluctuation is
very distinct, and there is but little to penetrate ; the lancet is indeed
preferable in this case, as its use is attended with less risk to the ab-
dominal viscera. The canula which you employ for this purpose should
be about three inches long, and made at the extremity like a common
catheter rounded at the end, and having holes at its sides, but quite
straight. You make an incision of about half an inch in length, and
then thrusting the canula into the abdomen, the water is removed with-
out danger. On removing the water in ascites, the patient is sometimes
seized with spasms in the diaphragm, towards the close of its evacua-
tion, as the diaphragm loses the support of the water. A man who
underwent the operation in this hospital had violent spasms towards the
close of the evacuation of the water, and in three days after died. On
examining the body after death, it was found that the sharp edge of the
canula had lacerated the anterior portion of the mesentery. On this
account I now use a canula rounded at the edge, instead of the sharp-
edged canula. The operation is extremely easy of performance ; I have
not the instruments with me at present, but I will shew you the mode
of performing it in the next lecture. The thickness of the cyst in en-
cysted dropsy is sometimes so great as to render it necessary to use
a longer trocar than usual. A case of this kind occurred to me, in which,
after having penetrated the abdomen, as I thought, on withdrawing the



ON PARACENTESIS ABDOMINIS.



373



trocar no water followed. I thought at first that I myself had met with
a case of dry tapping, but on employing a trocar considerably longer
than the former, about three inches and a half in length, the water fol-
lowed immediately.

The operation of paracentesis used to be performed midway between
the umbilicus and the spinous process of the ilium, but this practice
has been abandoned for a number of years ; the surgeon who first made
the alteration was Mr. Cline, senior. He was performing the operation
for paracentesis in this hospital during the time I was an apprentice ;
when he had introduced the trocar and canula at this part, he found
that a quantity of blood, which appeared to be arterial, issued with the
first water. The water became more and more discoloured, and towards
the conclusion of the operation little else but arterial blood flowed. Mr.
Cline shut up the wound without concluding the operation, in the hope
that pressure on the abdomen would put a stop to the bleeding, but the
man became extremely faint, and died in a few hours after the opera-
tion. On examining the body after death, it was found that the trocar
had passed through the epigastric artery, that artery being exposed, in
consequence of the rectus being thrown very much on one side in dropsy
by the pressure of the abdominal muscles. It occurred to Mr. Cline
that many persons had died of hemorrhage after the operation for para-
centesis, and Dr. Carmichael Smith made at that time a calculation of
the number of cases of this kind which had proved fatal. Mr. Cline, con-
sequently, ever after, in his lectures, advised the opening to be made an
inch below the umbilicus, where there is no vessel of any size, and no
danger in performing the operation. It is right that the bladder should
be emptied before the operation ; you should direct the patient to make
water, or if there should be any difficulty, draw it off by a catheter.
Mr. Cline was called to a lady for a complaint which was thought to be
dropsy of the abdomen, and which he at first conceived to be so himself.
On examination, however, he observed that the upper part of the abdo-
men was more free from fluctuation than the lower, and it occurred to
him that there might be some deception in the appearances, on account of
the distended state of the bladder. He asked the lady whether she made
water freely ; she replied in the affirmative. He was not satisfied, however,
anu upon introducing a catheter, he drew off an enormous quantity of
water, which had occasioned the appearance of a dropsy of the abdo-
men. A surgeon less cautious and intelligent than Mr. Cline might,
under such circumstances, have tapped the belly at a part where there
might have been considerable danger of wounding some of the abdo-
minal viscera. The patient may cither be placed in a chair during the
operation, or may remain in the recumbent posture in bed, while



K JC



374



ON PARACENTESIS ABDOMINIS.



the water is drawn ofl'. The latter position is preferable, because it
prevents the fainting and spasms which often arise, when the stomach
and diaphragm suddenly lose the support of the water. You should
direct the patient to turn his body over in the bed, and you may then
perform the operation with the greatest possible ease. There is no
necessity for a bandage on the upper part of the abdomen ; pressure on
the sides will be sufficient for the purpose of evacuating the water. If
you open the skin a little with a lancet, the trocar will enter with more
ease; you might, indeed, divide the linea alba with the lancet, but
this is not necessary. The usual mode of performing the operation, is
to place the patient in a high chair, with a pail or tub between his
knees, the surgeon sitting in a higher chair. A sheet is crossed round
the abdomen, the ends of which are held by an assistant, who presses
the sheet tightly on the abdomen. The surgeon makes a small incision
with the lancet and introduces the trocar through the linea alba, into
the part of the cyst or peritoneum only, according as it is ascites or
dropsy. The water should be completely evacuated ; if any portion is
suffered to remain, it will form the nidus, if I may be allowed the ex-
pression, for a future accumulation of water. It has been recommended
by a respectable surgeon of Chichester, to leave the canulain the wound,
for the purpose of exciting such a degree of irritation in the peritoneum
as may prevent the future accumulation of water. Experience will not
at present justify me in advising you to adopt this practice ; it has been
tried by a person in this town, and such irritation produced by it as led
to severe inflammation of the peritoneum ; and, subsequently, destruc-
tion of life. I should observe, however, that in cases where this disease
has not been re-produced, marks of inflammation in the abdomen have
been felt by the patient, for two or three days after the operation. In
general the water re-accumulates very shortly after the operation. Per-
sons are said to have undergone the operation for encysted dropsy of the
abdomen more than one hundred times : I have never met with such a
case in my own practice, but there is a tomb-stone in a church-yard at
Dartford, in Kent, on which it is stated that the lady buried under it
underwent the operation more than one hundred times. It sometimes
happens that ovarian dropsy ceases to be re-produced, after the opera-
tion has been repeatedly performed. This happened in a lady who had
undergone the operation two or three times in the year, for upwards of
twenty years. In general, the disease returns after the operation ;
there are very few examples to the contrary. I have known but three
cases of encysted dropsy of the abdomen, in which the disease has not
returned; one in a young lady of seventeen, another in a medical man.
under twenty, and another in a boy, who had an enlargement of the



ON PARACENTESIS ABDOMINIS.



375



mesenteric glands, followed by ascites. The ovarium sometimes sup-
purates after the operation, and this suppuration proves destructive to
life ; the quantity of matter secreted in these cases is enormous. On
the other hand, I have known ovarian dropsy spontaneously cured.
The wife of a veterinary surgeon had a dropsy of the ovaries spontane-
ously cured by the adhesion of the ovaries to the umbilicus. Ulceration
was produced, and the fluid contained in the cyst gradually discharged.
I have known the ovarium glued to one of the intestines, and fluid dis-
charged in a similar manner. In one of the cases to which I allude,
there is still some discharge of fluid ; though for a length of time the
symptoms of dropsy entirely ceased. A patient, after undergoing the
operation for this disease, will ask you whether she should drink very
little. In general we answer, that the patient should drink as little as
possible ; but it is doubtful whether the disposition to a return of the
disease is much altered by abstinence from tjrink. I once recommended
the wife of a coachman, after the operation for encysted dropsy, to drink
as little as possible, and to allay her thirst by sucking the juice of
oranges. She followed this plan, but was, very soon after, again the
subject of the operation for ovarian dropsy. I then recommended her
to drink as she pleased : she returned to her favourite beverage, porter,
and the cyst did not fill nearly so fast as before. This may be in some
degree accounted for, as she made very little urine while she sucked
oranges, but passed a great deal when she returned to her ordinary
beverage. It would appear that the quantity of fluid taken makes no
difference as to the return of the disease, as it passes off by the kid-
neys : I do not mean, however, to build any theory upon a single case.

ACCUMULATION OF FLUID IN THE CHEST.

An operation is occasionally, but very rarely, performed for this disease.

I will state to you all I have been able to learn on thi3 subject.
In the first place I have never known a case in which water had
collected in the cavity of the chest, in which the operation of pa-
racentesis of the thorax has been performed, where the patients
have not died. This is not surprising, because hydrothorax is the
result of the disease of the thoracic viscera, disease of the lungs or
heart, and the cause remains though the effect is removed. Paracen-
tesis of the thorax, however, is not unsuccessful, when matter has accu-
mulated in the chest. Matter is sometimes confined in the chest
by adhesion, producing spurious empyema, and sometimes it is
diffused through the whole cavity of the pleura on one side. The
marks of accumulation of matter in the chest are, considerable pain in
the side, severe fever, and constitutional irritation ; cough, with diffi-



376



ON PARACENTESIS ABDOMINIS.



culty of breathing, inability to lie, except on the side on which the
matter is accumulating ; and lastly, which you would not expect, con-
siderable enlargement of the chest on that side. The reason of this
difference in the size of the chest on the side affected is, that the accu-
mulation of fluid prevents expiration on that side, and the ribs are un-
able to descend. There are other means of ascertaining the presence of
fluid in the chest, to which I need hardly allude, as you have, no doubt,
seen the instrument, (the stethoscope) used by a physician in this hos-
pital. I have not had sufficient experience of this instrument to say
decidedly how far it is available for this purpose. When matter has
accumulated in the chest, the patient may be relieved by the following
operation : — You draw the skin as much as possible upwards, and cut
down with your scalpel on the upper edge of the eighth or ninth rib.
Having cut through the intercostal muscles by this incision, without in-
troducing the knife through the pleura, you pass the canula through the
pleura, and it enters the chest. The matter escapes as soon as you
withdraw the trocar, and after which draw the skin down : the wound
closes without danger of any further inflammation beyond the adhesive.
(The learned professor proceeded to shew the mode of performing this
operation on the dead subject.) By this operation I have known several
lives preserved. Mr. Bryant, a brother of the surgeon of that name,
recovered after the operation, which was performed by Sir B. Harwood,
the late professor of anatomy at Cambridge. The two following cases
of empyema have occurred in my practice : — I was called by Mr. M.,
a surgeon at Cheltenham, to see a young lady who had a considerable
swelling of the abdomen in the region of the spleen. There was an en-
largement of the left side, accompanied with difficulty of breathing,
cough, and that constitutional irritation which is commonly called hectic
fever. On examining this case, I said that I thought there was fluid,
and on laying the chest bare, there seemed to be a fulness between the
third and fourth rib, a little above the nipple. Upon pressing the
swelling in the abdomen, and putting my finger on the intercostal
muscles, the fluid undulated between one point and the other. I said
there was a collection of matter in the left pleura, and, on making a
small incision with the point of the lancet, a gush of matter came from
the chest. On putting my hand on the abdomen, I increased the flow
most abundantly, and I then understood, what I did not before per-
fectly understand, that the diaphragm was pushed down by the pres-
sure of matter from above, and that pressure upwards upon the dia-
phragm assisted in emptying the chest. I did not empty the chest en-
tirely on that day, but putting a bit of adhesive plaster on it, I said I
would empty it a little more the next, and I proceeded in this way to



ON FISTULA IN ANO.



377



discharge the matter gradually from day to day. This young lady is
now in perfect health. In the last year, I saw a young lady who had
a similar enlargement of the side, attended with similar symptoms. I
treated this case nearly the same, but I found a great advantage in fix-
ing a girdle round the abdomen, which prevented the diaphragm from
again descending by any accumulation of matter. With respect to spu-
rious empyema, it is merely a common abscess, which must be opened,
and treated in the ordinary way. I have only one observation to make
with respect to spurious empyema. A boy, who had been a long time
at sea, and who was the subject of sea-scurvy, came to England with
a swelling in his left side. I had no doubt, from its undulation during
coughing, that there was matter contained in the cavity of the chest, and
I was going to insert my lancet, when I observed that the boy appeared
to be in very bad health. I inquired more particularly as to his symp-
toms, and it appeared that he had petechise, and that his gums occa-
sionally bled. I gave him bark with citric acid, and, as his health im-
proved under this treatment, the matter was absorbed, and the swelling
entirely disappeared.

The next subject of this evening’s lecture is one which some of you
may think scarcely worth your attention, and with the treatment of
which you may imagine that you are fully acquainted ; the complaint
to which I allude is

FISTULA IN ANO.

This is a disease in which you will be called upon to operate more
frequently, perhaps, than in any other. I do not think it a disease
which is very easy to treat ; it very often baffles the skill of the best
surgeons. A fistula in ano will hardly ever heal of itself, after the ope-
ration is performed, without the utmost attention on the part of the
surgeon. The sphincter ani is the source of the difficulty in this com-
plaint ; every time the patient has an evacuation, the contraction of the
sphincter ani separates one side of the abscess from the other, and thus
the process of adhesion and inosculation of the granulations is continu-
ally interrupted. Understanding this, you will see that the principle of
treatment consists in the division of the sphincter ani ; if you do not
divide the sphincter, you had better not attempt to treat the patient at all.

Fistula in ano is more painful than a common abscess ; the patient
has excruciating pain in the evacuation of his feces, dreadful tenesmus,
and very often retention of urine, the pressure of the matter preventing
the passage of the urine through the urethra. The causes of this dis-
ease are various ; it sometimes arises from a costive state of body ; fre-
quently from the pressure of hardened feces passing through the intes-
tines. It sometimes arises from absolutely opposite causes ; thus, fis-

K K 2



378



ON FISTULA IN ANO.



tula in ano is frequently the consequence of long-continued diarrhoea,
producing irritation in the mucous membrane, which extends to the
cellular tissue. It is often the result of some distant complaint ; as dis-
ease of the liver, or derangement of the alimentary canal, producing an
accumulation of blood in the mesenteric vessels, and a congestion which
is determined to the anus. Persons who lead a sedentary life, take
little exercise, and feed highly, are particularly subject to this disease.
It is often the result of disease of the chest, and very commonly occurs
at the close of phthisis pulmonalis. It is necessary, therefore, to in-
quire whether the patient labours under cough, dyspno»a, and whether
his constitution is greatly impaired. No operation will avail without
attention to the state of distant parts, and this is the reason why sur-
geons have so often lost their reputation by performing an operation for
this complaint at an improper time. You may divide the sinus, but
if the fistula depends on a disordered state of distant parts, the fistula
will never heal without attention to the constitution of the patient.
There is considerable variety in the size and complication of fistulse ;
here is a preparation in which the sinus is confined to one side of the
gut ; there is another in which the gut is half surrounded, and another
in which the disease completely encircles the intestine. When there is
an opening on each side, it is best to perform the operation first on one
side, and then on the other. Here is a preparation taken from a patient
who died of this disease, which very rarely happens ; the intestines and
bladder are surrounded by the fistula ; the rectum also is surrounded by
sinuses, very high up. The fistula passed to the groin, and there dis-
charged itself ; this is the most complicated case of fistula I have ever
seen. The fistula sometimes extends to the nates, and burrows to a
great distance behind the glutei muscles. Fistula; are called blind when
the matter has made its way into the rectum, without making an open-
ing externally ; they are extremely difficult to treat. The medical
treatment of fistulee in ano will depend on their cause ; if they arise
from costiveness, I need not point out to you the remedies to which
you should have recourse ; if from disease of the liver, give calomel and
saline purges ; if they arise from disease of the chest, as hydrothorax, I
scarcely know what medicine to recommend ; these diseases almost
always prove destructive to life. It is of great importance to give such
medicines as will bring the fistula into a healthy state. With this
view the balsam of copaiba may be given with advantage ; if there is
much irritation, give soda, which has great efficacy in diminishing the
irritability of the rectum. Aromatic medicines should be given ; espe-
cially the medicine which used to be called Ward’s paste, which has been
very properly introduced in the last edition of the London Pharmacc-



ON FISTULA IN ANO. 379

poeia, having been found by experience to produce excellent effects in
this disease. The composition of this paste is as follows : —

Of Pepper, two drachms,

Of Elicampane, and Fennel Seeds, each half an ounce.

This is to be mixed up with honey, so as to form an electuary ; and
a tea-spoonful of it to be taken two or three times a-day. This medi-
cine, in a very short time, brings the fistula into a healing state ; healthy
granulations arise from the surface, and the discharge, instead of being
serous or bloody, consists of good pus. Submuriate of mercury, with
saline purges, should be occasionally given during the use of these
aromatic confections, with a view of promoting the secretion of the liver
and intestines. The operation of dividing the sphincter ani, is simple
in proportion as you find a ready opening into the rectum. You intro-
duce a small probe-pointed bistoury into the fistula, pass your finger up
the rectum to meet the instrument, and carrying the point downwards,
divide the intervening parts. If the fistula is very extensive, you will
be under the necessity of putting your finger on the extremity of the
instrument, drawing the knife downwards. If the fistula does not open
into the rectum, you must pass the instrument up the sinus till it
reaches the extremity ; put your finger into the rectum to meet the
knife, place it along the end of the knife, and move the rectum for
some little time with your finger nail, and then, cutting through the
cellular tissue, bring the point of the instrument into the rectum.
Mr. Savigny invented for this purpose a knife with two blades, one
pointed, the other round ; the pointed knife sliding on the side of a
probe bistoury. The objection to this instrument, however, is, that it
occupies too much space ; so that a small sinus will not receive it. A
very copious hemorrhage generally follows the division of the intestine;
you must not, therefore, leave your patient, but endeavour to stop the
hemorrhage by introducing a portion of lint into the wound. No union
of the sphincter ani will take place, until granulations have arisen at
the parts of the wound most distant from the rectum. You should not
change the lint for several days, but apply poultices, and merely intro-
duce a probe from day to day, to see that there is no improper adhesion.
If you were to put fresh lint immediately, it would excite inflammation,
and produce fresh abscesses in the surrounding cellular tissue. On the
fourth or fifth day you may insert a small quantity of fresh lint :
healthy granulations will arise in about a fortnight, under the treatment
which I have already pointed out to you ; you may then apply lint
dipped in a solution of the sulphate of copper.

The sore will often assume an indolent state, when you think it is on
the point of healing. Injections are sometimes successfully employed



380



ON DISEASE OF THE TESTICLE.



for the purpose of healing fistuiae in ano. A gentleman came to me
with a very deep fistula in ano ; he had been operated upon before,
when a very alarming hemorrhage followed the division of the sphincter;
the sinus was so deep, that it completely absorbed the probe : under
these circumstances, I was unwilling to perform the operation, except
by gradually dividing the fistula an inch or two at a time. However,
I told him that injections now and then succeeded, and I recommended
him, therefore, to try the effect of an injection of port wine and water.
A few days after, he injected port wine alone into the sinus, and the
result was, that there was no further suppuration, but adhesion took
place, as in the case of hydrocele. His cure was thus completed without
an operation. Fistuiae are sometimes cured by the introduction of a
ligature, which gradually cuts through the part. A thread is passed
through the sinus, brought out by the rectum, and tied very tightly.
Many persons will not submit to the operation of being cut for fistula,
but prefer enduring pain much greater than any occasioned by the
operation. In such cases the introduction of a ligature will sometimes
prove successful.



LECTURE XLVTII.

In this evening's lecture I shall show you the operation of castration,
first describing to you the diseases of the testicle which occasionally ren-
der such an operation necessary. The first disease of the testicle which
I shall describe to you, is that in which hydatids or cysts are formed
within it. This is a disease of no very unffequent occurrence, and it
affects the young rather than those who are advanced in years. It
begins at the extremity of the epidydimis where it joins the tes-
ticle : there is an enlargement of the part which extends through the
epidydimis towards the vas deferens, and from the epidydimis to the
body of the testicle. The disease is never attended with pain, unless it
acquires a very considerable magnitude. The spermatic cord is a little
varicose, but not hard ; the spermatic veins are larger than usual. There
is very little inflammatory tendency, and the patient can bear the part
to be roughly handled without pain. At the first glance the disease
bears very much the appearance of hydrocele. There is very little dif-
ference in the state of the spermatic cord, except that it is somewhat
more vascular than usual. The disease is confined to the testicle and
epidydimis, and there is no instance of its having extended to the sper-
matic cord or any other part of the body. It generally attacks young
persons between the age of seventeen and thirty ; the most advanced



ON SCIRRHUS OF THE TESTICLE.



381



period of life at which I have seen it is thirty-eight. It attacks persons
therefore at that period of life at which they are most anxious that these
parts should be perfectly free from disorder. The nature of this dis-
ease, as it appears on dissection, is strikingly illustrated in a beautiful
preparation on the table ; you will there see bags of various sizes formed
in every part of the testicle ; the smallest not larger than a pin’s head,
and the largest about the size of a marble. The cysts consist of cel-
lular tissue, not of glandular structure ; and the testicle is entirely obli-
terated, every portion of the seminiferous tubes being absorbed by pres-
sure. ' A great number of hydatids contain water only ; some, water
tinged with yellow serum ; and others, opaque mucus, which, when the
cyst is opened, is found adhering to its inner side. The operation of
castration is sometimes required for this disease on account of its mag-
nitude ; the patient being unable to conceal the disease, is incapable of
going into society, and will frequently intreat that the operation may be
performed. It is noton account of the pain that he suffers or any appre-
hensions that the surgeon need entertain, but on account of the incon-
venience to which a patient is exposed, that the operation is usually per-
formed. The constitution of the patient is entirely unaffected by the
complaint : indeed I have generally seen it in patients enjoying the most
vigorous health. A man, in every other respect in perfect health, will
come up from the country to have the operation performed, and return
immediately after it to his accustomed avocations. I am not aware of
any instance in which, after the operation, the disease has returned,
either in the spermatic cord or in the other testicle. The disease is en-
tirely local and unattended with danger.

SCIRRHUS OF THE TESTICLE.

The next disease of the testicle to which I shall direct your attention
is scirrhus, similar to that which attacks the breast. True scirrhus of
the testicle is an extremely rare complaint, and I am afraid many tes-
ticles have been removed under the supposition of their being scirrhous,
which might have been saved. I have seen but very few instances of
true scirrhus. A truly scirrhous affection of the testicle begins in the
body of it, with an extremely hard swelling, which may immediately
inform the surgeon of the nature of the disease. It feels like a marble
body lodged within the scrotum, and it is tuberculated on its surface.
It sometimes begins in the centre of the testicle, and gradually extends
until the whole is involved in the disease. The epidydimis next be-
comes the seat of the disease, that portion being first attacked which
communicates with the vas deferens. The spermatic cord becomes en-
larged, and tubercles of various sizes form upon it. After the spermatic



382



ON SCIRRHUS OF THE TESTICLE.

cord has become enlarged, a hard tumour forms beneath the emulgent
artery, which may be felt through the abdominal parietes. In true
scirrhus, the testicle does not become enlarged to any considerable size.
After the swelling in the loins, the thigh becomes enlarged, and cedema-
tous on the side of the disease, which arises from the obstruction to ab-
sorption ; and the pressure on the veins may also have influence in pro-
ducing this effect. In the former disease which I noticed, I observed
that the general health of the patient was not affected ; but this is not
the case in scirrhus of the testicle. The countenance undergoes a re-
markable change ; it is yellow, and sunk, a fixed colour terminates
abruptly in the cheek. When you walk through the wards, and ob-
serve a patient greatly emaciated with this fixed redness of the cheek,
the rest of the face being extremely sallow, you may almost conclude,
from these appearances, that he is labouring under some scirrhous or
cancerous affection. This disease differs also very much from the
last, in being attended with excruciating pain, which becomes more
intolerable as the disease advances. It is generally from a year
and a half to two years before the disease destroys the patient. —
When you cut into a swelling arising from this cause, you will find
it composed of a considerable number of lobes ; and cartilaginous sub-
stances, and earthy matter, are frequently deposited in the testicle.
[The learned professor exhibited a preparation illustrating these ap-
pearances], Such is the character of true scirrhus; it attacks per-
sons at an advanced period ; in general between sixty and seventy
years of age, seldom under fifty-five years. There is a preparation
in which the tuberculated character of the disease is still 'more
manifest than in the last. Tl;e operation for this disease is ex-
tremely unsuccessful, for it rarely happens that the disease does
not return after the removal of the scirrhous testicle. This may
arise in some measure from the late period at which patieuts usually
apply for relief. If the spermatic cord has not become enlarged, you
may, by giving the patient alterative medicines for a length of time,
succeed sometimes in preventing the return of the disease after the
operation : it is, however, an operation which is, in general, even less
successful than that for scirrhous tubercles of the breast. I have never
performed it after the spermatic cord has become enlarged, because 1
know that the disease will be sure to return. I was once going round
the other hospital, when I pointed out a man who had scirrhus of the
testicle, with an enlargement of the spermatic cord, and observed that
this patient would probably die from the operation if it were performed,
and that if he did not, the disease would certainly return. There were
some foolish young men present, however, who thought the man might



FUNGOID DISEASE OF THE TESTICLE. 383

be saved by the operation, and one more foolish than the rest took a
lodging for the man at Blackheath, where he performed the operation,
from which it is scarcely necessary to add, the man died. If it were not
for the compassion which one feels for a patient under such circum-
stances, we might be induced to say, that such a result was a proper
punishment for his presumption. Presumption, gentlemen, is the off-
spring of folly, the child of ignorance, and it commonly happens that a
young man, who thinks himself an exceedingly clever fellow, is a parti-
cularly egregious blockhead. It was observed by one of the greatest
philosophers of antiquity, at the close of a life devoted to the acquisi-
tion of knowledge — that all he knew was, that he knew nothing ; and
if we consider the amount of individual acquirement, as compared with
the knowledge which is either unattainable, or which the human facul-
ties have not yet reached, the observation of the philosopher is strictly
true. A man of real ability, instead of pluming himself on the extent
of his acquisitions, will, in proportion as he advances in life, lament
that there is still so much of which he knows nothing. To return, how-
ever, from this digression, what I advise, gentlemen, is, that you should
never perform the operation of castration, when you find the spermatic
cord affected at the abdominal ring.

FUNGOID DISEASE OF THE TESTICLE.

This disease is much more common than the last ; it begins, like the
true scirrhus, in the body of the testicle : — but unlike that disease, it
almost immediately affects the whole body of the testicle at its first
commencement. In a very short time the epidydimis becomes affected ;
next the spermatic cord; and, in the course of a very few weeks, a
tumour forms in the loins. The disease is at first unattended with pain ;
but, when the spermatic cord and the tumour in the loins become of
great magnitude, the patient suffers considerably. In this respect it
differs from true scirrhus, in which the swelling never attains any great
size. The fungoid swelling of the testicle sometimes increases to the
weight of several pounds ; the appearance of the surface is somewhat
livid ; the spermatic cord is loaded with blood, and in some parts you
may feel a fluctuation as if there were a cyst within it ; it becomes
covered with tubercles of considerable size. The tumour has a soft,
pulpy feel, readily yielding to pressure ; and on the first examination
you might suppose the disease to be hydrocele. I have known it fre-
quently punctured on the supposition of a fluid being contained in it,
when nothing but a little blood has followed the operation. It may be
distinguished from hydrocele in the following manner : — In the first
place, it is flattened on the sides, and round on the fore part, whereas in



384 FUNGOID DISEASE OF THE TESTICLE.

hydrocele it is pyriform ; if you squeeze any part of the fungoid tumour,
the patient will complain of the pain arising from the compression of
the testicle, which he will not do in hydrocele, unless you squeeze the
posterior part of it ; the fungoid tumour rather yields to the pressure of
the finger, than fluctuates from one side to the other, as in hydrocele ;
and, lastly, the great weight of the swelling when you lift up the sides,
and the livid appearance of the scrotum, mark the malignant character
of this disease.

The disease often occurs in young people at about the age of puberty :
I have seen it, in one instance, in a child four years old ; I showed you
the other evening the testicle of this child, which was loaded with tuber-
cles. The period of life at which it may be said usually to occur is be-
tween the age of seventeen and thirty-five. The disease is not confined
to the testicle, but affects other parts of the body in a great variety of
situations. It differs from scirrhus chiefly in the swelling being of a
soft kind : indeed it has been termed soft cancer, for it is in many re-
spects, though not precisely, of the same nature with scirrhus. If you
take blood from a person under this disease, you will find it so attenuated,
that it will hardly coagulate ; and if you have an opportunity of seeing
the adhesive process, you will find the inflammation scarcely supporting
blood-vessels ; what few vessels are pushed through the part assume the
appearance of fungus. If you inject a fungoid testicle, you will find it
in some parts vascular, while in others blood-vessels are not received.
On dissecting it you will find a portion occupied by blood not very firmly
coagulated, and a portion by adhesive matter poured out by inflamma-
tion which resembles brain in a putrid state ; in a part of the swelling
will be found cysts containing a serous fluid.

The scirrhous and fungoid tumours are the only malignant diseases
to which the testicle is subject. The operation may be performed with
a hope of success, if the patient be entirely free from other complaints, but
in a great majority of the cases which I have seen, the disease has
returned. Here is a preparation taken from a patient in whom the
disease did not return ; in this case the disease was in the earliest stage
in which I have seen it. There are, in general, tubercles of a fungoid
character in other parts of the body, which destroy, notwithstanding all
that can be done by alterative medicines, after the operation. We may
sometimes prevent the disposition to the formation of this diseaae by
giving alterative medicines, but no medicine with which we are ac-
quainted has any power over it when it is once formed. Do not, there-
fore, go over the same treatment which experience has shown to be
ineffectual, but try, amidst the great variety of new powers with which
the discoveries of modern chemists have furnished medicine, whether



FUNGOID DISEASE OF THE TESTICLE. 385

some of these new substances may not have a specific effect in this
disease. I do not mean to say, that by giving alterative medicines, so
as to improve the general health, you may not prevent the disposition
to the formation of the disease, but that scirrhous and fungoid diseases
are specific actions, which, when they are once engendered in the con-
stitution, we know of no medicine to counteract. He who says we do,
is an empiric, and an impostor.

Having mentioned these two diseases, which are, in a great degree,
uncontrollable by our profession, I will now call your attention to a
complaint which is often mistaken for them, but which is extremely
easy of cure — I mean a complaint which may be called chronic enlarge-
ment of the testicle. You may say the other diseases are chronic : true,
they are chronic, but then they are specific diseases. The disease to
which I now allude, I shall call simple chronic enlargement of the
testicle. It often happens that a person consults a surgeon under the
following circumstances : he comes to you with a considerable enlarge-
ment of his testicle, which feels extremely hard, and which you might
suppose at once to be scirrhous. Upon your inquiring whether he has
any other complaint, he will tell you that he has occasionally had
symptoms of a syphilitic kind. Whether he has taken mercury ? Oh,
yes, he will say, a good deal, and probably that this disease began
while he was taking mercury. Whether he has any disease in his
urethra ? he will perhaps say that he has some stricture, or he may say
that he has no obstruction whatever. Having made these enquiries, and
received such answers, you may say to the party, “ follow my advice
implicitly, sir, and I promise you that this enlargement of the testicle
shall be removed, and in the course of a few weeks you will be quite
well.” He will be delighted at hearing this, or he may be disposed to
doubt whether you will be able to succeed. You must, in the first
place, strictly enjoin him to keep the recumbent posture : without a
strict adherence to this, it will be impossible to effect his cure ; it is
absolutely essential to his recovery. You must apply leeches, and
evaporating lotions to the part, and desire him to take three, or even
five, grains of calomel with opium night and morning. If he does this
the enlargement of the testicle will subside in the course of a few weeks.
This disease is of a similar nature with that which attacks the eye,
which has been called iritis, and requires the same mode of treatment.
It occurs in constitutions which have been injured by intemperance and
over-excitement ; it will increase until the testicle is entirely destroyed,
unless you prevent it by the means I have just pointed out to you.
The patient will probably ask whether you mean to salivate him ; tell
him he must have his mouth well affected, so as to produce a consider-

L L



386 FUNGOID DISEASE OF THE TESTICLE.

able discharge of saliva, shewing that the mercury has acted on the
constitution.

Apply leeches to the part occasionally, and evaporating lotions, as the
liquor ammonias acetatis, and spirits of wine. Do not on any account
attempt to introduce a bougie, even though the irritability of the
urethra should be the source of the enlargement. The introduction of
a bougie at first would only add to the irritability of the urethra: wait
till you have altered the constitution by the means I have pointed out,
and the swelling of the testicle is considerably reduced ; and then, but
not till then, you may resort to the use of the bougie with advantage.

I will tell you a case which made a strong impression on my mind.
An officer in the Peninsula had a chronic swelling of the testicle, for
which he consulted surgeons, and he was at length told that there tvas
no hope of a cure except by removal of the testicle. He submitted to
the operation, and resumed his professional duties. Eight months after,
the remaining testicle became enlarged ; he was exceedingly alarmed;
surrendered his situation, and came to this country for advice. He
applied to myself and two other surgeons ; we had a consultation on his
case, and our opinion was, that there was no necessity for removing the
other testicle. All he was advised to do was, to keep his sofa steadily,
to take mercury till his mouth became sore, and to apply stimulating
lotions to the part. In five weeks the swelling subsided, and in six
weeks this gentleman was perfectly well. This chronic enlargement of
the testicle very rarely requires an operation, if treated in the way I
have now stated. When 1 commenced my profession, I had no more
idea but that the testicle required removal than any other surgeon at
that time. I have seen a great number of them removed, and I confess
that I have removed many myself: but if I were to do so now, I should
be guilty of a great crime, for it is a disease which readily yields to the
medical means which I have pointed out. There are several prepa-
rations on the table of testicles, taken from persons under this disease,
before the efficacy of this treatment was ascertained ; one of them, 1 am
sorry to say, by myself. There is a species of chronic enlargement of
the testicle, however, which requires the operation, as large abscesses are
sometimes produced by it, which occasion great pain, so that the patient
himself becomes anxious for the removal of the testicle. Fungous
granulations spring from the surface of these abscesses ; they are not of
the true malignant fungoid kind, but they resemble the granulations
which spring through the dura mater, in consequence of injury to the
brain. Even in this case, however, the granulations may be cut off
from the surface, and the integuments brought together, so as frequently
to render the removal of the testicle unnecessary-



FUNGOID DISEASE OF THE TESTICLE.



387



Mr. Travers has cured a case or two of this kind by the pressure of
adhesive plaster. I have seen cases cured by sprinkling powdered sul-
phate of copper, or nitrate of silver, on the part. The irritable testicle
is a very formidable disease, and, as far as I know, has not been
described in surgical books. This complaint generally resists all the
means which may be employed to subdue it; and I have, in three
instances, been under the necessity of removing the testicle. The part
is so exceedingly tender, that the patient cannot bear to walk, as
pressure of the testicle gives him excruciating pain. The moment you
touch the part, the patient shrinks from you, and complains of dreadful
pain, which will last for hours after. The pain passes up the spermatic
cord to the loins, entering along the nerves of the thigh. It may be
relieved for the moment by medical means, as by giving the blue pill
with hyoscyamus, but it generally returns, and will continue for months,
and even years. The patient lies on his sofa from morning to night,
and is wholly unable to pursue any occupation. I once asked a medical
man who was labouring under this complaint, whether he found it
absolutely impossible to exert himself, and he told me he should have
been extremely glad to join the regiment to which he was surgeon, but
he found it utterly impossible. In three cases, as before stated, I have
been under the necessity of removing the testicle for this disease. The
first case was that of a gentleman who came from Charleston, in South
Carolina, with this disease, to try the effect of a change of climate.
The part was so excessively tender that he could not bear the slightest
handling, and he even dreaded the slightest motion. He confined him-
self to his chamber for a considerable length of time ; I tried a great
variety of means, until I grew tired of him, for I confess, gentlemen,
that, when a disease does not yield readily, 1 am apt to take French
leave. (A laugh.) He applied to Mr. Abernethy, who attended him
for a considerable time, and then to Mr. Pearson, who kept him also
for a very great length of time. Being no better for the advice he had
received, he came back to me again ; I advised him to go to Margate,
and try the use of the warm bath, llis general health was improved
by the sea-bathing, but he chose to come home in one of the Margate
coaches, and the consequence was, that by the time he reached Black-
heath, he was incapable of travelling any further. He was put to bed
at an inn on Blackheath, where he remained a long time beiore he was
able to proceed to London. He at length made up his mind to submit
to the operation before returning to Charleston, and I removed the tes-
ticle. He soon recovered from the operation, and 1 have had the
pleasure of hearing, that since his return to Charleston he has taken to



388 ON THE OPERATION OF CASTRATION.



himself a wife, who lias produced him several children. The second case
was that of a gentleman who had been a long time the subject of the
complaint, and who, after submitting to the operation, got perfectly well.
The third case was that of the surgeon to whom I just alluded, and who
insisted on the operation being performed. The degree of suffering to
which a patient is exposed from an irritable state of the testicle can
scarcely be conceived ; it is for the most part unmanageable by medical
treatment, but will, after a great length of time, sometimes wear itself
out. Mr. Wardrop, a surgeon of Liverpool, once observed to me, in
consulting upon a patient’s case, that he had an idea of cutting down on
the spermatic cord, and dividing the nerves which went to the testicle.
Whether he ever put his idea in practice, I know not ; it was at any
rate ingenious, and showed his knowledge of anatomy.

THE OPERATION OF CASTRATION.

This is one of the most simple operations in surgery. You grasp the
testicle in your left hand ; begin your incision at the upper part of the
abdominal ring, and extend it to the lower extremity of the testicle.
You must not leave any part of the scrotum undivided, because if you
make the opening by which you draw out the testicle from the upper
part of the scrotum, a bag of matter will form at the lower part, which
will prevent the healing of the wound. Lay bare the spermatic cord
completely at the abdominal ring ; and put a needle and ligature
through it and the artery of the vas deferens. Some say this is a work
of supererogation ; but it is not so, because, if you omit it, it often
happens that when you divide the cord, it is drawn within the abdomi-
nal ring by the action of the cremaster, and you cannot get at it without
slitting up the abdomen. This once happened during the operation of
castration, at which Mr. Cline, senior, was present. The surgeon had
removed the testicle, and when he came to secure the vessels, the sper-
matic cord could not be found. Mr. Cline brought the spermatic artery
into view, by slitting up the abdominal ring. Having divided the
cord, you draw it towards you, and detach the cellular membrane
behind it : in this consists the whole of this very easy operation.
The spermatic artery, and the artery of the vas deferens are all that
require to be secured in the cord ; in the scrotum there are several which
require to be secured. I shall in the next lecture proceed to the ampu-
tations.



ON THE DIFFERENT AMPUTATIONS. 389



LECTURE XLIX.

O.V THE DIFFERENT AMPUTATIONS.

Operations are now much less frequently performed than they were
in tire days of our ancestors, owing to the great improvements which
have taken place in surgical science. Many of the diseases which were
formerly considered incurable can now be easily cured by modes of treat-
ment corresponding with our increased pathological knowledge. Many
accidents, for example, where the parts are much lacerated, and for
which the ancients would have operated, we leave to nature, by whose
influence the different reparative processes will be set in action, and the
injured limb restored to health and utility. When amputation is ne-
cessary, nature will occasionally even perform this operation unassisted
by art ; in mortification of the feet it often happens that the leg will be
amputated by nature as effectually as though it had been accomplished
by the knife. At Guy’s Hospital there is at the present moment a case
of this description. You have seen, in the case which I allude to, first,
a division of the skin — then the division of the muscles shorter than the
skin, and lastly, the division of the bones ; the fibula has already sepa-
rated, and the exfoliation of the tibia is rapidly going on. Nature in
this case if left to herself, would, without doubt, accomplish the ampu-
tation of the leg ; but the safety of the man requires, I think, that the
remainder of the bone should be divided by the saw, for if this be not
done, the long continued excitement may wear out the powers of the
constitution.

Diseased joints used very frequently to lead to the performance of
amputation in young persons as well as in the old ; but amputation is
much less frequently performed at the present day, in consequence of
such disease, than some years back ; even diseases of the joints of the
upper extremities of children give rise to amputation much less fre-
quently than in the days of our forefathers, but in chronic diseases of
the ankle and knee, amputation is still very commonly performed ; there
is, however, a marked distinction in these chronic enlargements ; one
variety may be called congenital, which exists from the birth of the
child, and the other is from some debilitating cause which produces
the complaint after birth ; as the constitution, therefore, is radically
weak or vitiated in the former of these affections, you cannot expect that
such permanent benefit will result in that case, as in the latter, where
the constitution becomes affected from some accidental circumstance.

With respect to diseases of the ankle and knee joints, amputation for
such complaints will occasionally be necessary both of the leg and thigh;

l l2



390



ON THE DIFFERENT AMPUTATIONS.

indeed, chronic affections of the ankle and knee give rise to amputation
as frequently as diseases in any part of the body. For compound frac-
tures we seldom amputate directly ; they are seldom so severe as to re-
quire immediate amputation, and it is not until gangrene or disease of
the bone has taken place, that it is deemed necessary to amputate ;
compound fractures, however, from the superior manner in which they
are now treated, do much better than formerly, and very severe injuries
of this description will often terminate most favourably ; therefore, upon
the whole, amputations are much less frequently performed at the pre-
sent epoch than in the days of our ancestors. Now, gentlemen, before
you amputate, it is necessary that you should apply, in such situations
where it can be accomplished, the tourniquet, an instrument which con-
sists of a strong band, capable of completely surrounding the thigh, two
brass bridges, a long screw, a pad, and two small rollers. The rollers
are situated one at each end of the under bridge. The bridges lie in
immediate contact with each other, the concave part of the upper bridge
completely fitting the convex surface of the under. The pad is placed
in the arch of the under bridge, and which pad is to be placed imme-
diately upon the vessel whose circulation is to be stopped ; after having
thus applied the pad, you are to bring the band around the limb, and
secure it tightly upon the upper bridge, then, turning the screw by
which the two bridges are connected, you can produce upon the vessel
any degree of pressure that may be required, for the screw separates one
bridge from the other, thus raising the upper bridge, pressing upon the
lower one, at the same time tightening the band, and forcing the pad
upon the vessel, you effectually control the circulation of the blood in
the limb to which the instrument is applied ; this is the tourniquet at
present in general use ; another has lately been invented having small
spikes at one extremity of the bridge, and these perforate the band
after it has been tightly applied round the limb, when, upon turning
the screw of this instrument, the same effect is produced as by the other.

The tourniquet, in operations where it can be used, will be found of
very great service ; I mean, will be of considerable utility to the operator
in point of facilitating the operation, and at the same time rendering it
more safe. As an auxiliary, however, its convenience will be much
more felt in private than in hospital practice, for in the former there is
commonly a deficiency of those able assistants, whom we so generally
meet with in the latter, yet the tourniquet, when it can be applied, will
more effectually control the circulation than pressure by the hand.

I will now show you where the tourniquet should be applied when
we operate on the upper extremity : for example, if you amputate the
arm above the elbow, it should be fixed us near as possible to the axilla,



ON THE DIFFERENT AMPUTATIONS. 391



this will afford you room for dissenting back the integuments, and, at
the same time, will allow of the retraction of the muscles. If you am-
putate below the elbow, the instrument should be applied about the
middle of the arm, and this is the best place for putting it, on account
of the pressure acting more immediately upon the vessel in this situa-
tion than when applied higher up, for here nothing but integuments and
cellular membrane at the inner edge of the biceps muscle covers the
artery ; therefore, if you operate below the elbow, let the tourniquet
be applied on the middle of the arm ; if above the elbow, not lower
than one third of the length of the arm downwards.

When you amputate below the knee you should fix the instrument
on the middle of the thigh, with the pad on the femoral artery, at
the inner side of the sartorius muscle ; if you amputate above the knee,
you must then fix it one third the length of the limb downwards : the
reason of your applying it so high up is, to allow of the retraction of
the muscles, as I before stated to you with regard to the arm, but its
necessity is much greater here, as I shall hereafter explain to you.
Well, then, in amputation of the upper extremity the pad is placed
at the inside of the biceps, and in amputation of the lower extremity,
if below the knee, near the middle of the thigh, and at the inner edge
of the sartorius muscle. The first amputations I shall show you will
be those of the fingers ; we now very rarely amputate at either the second
or third joint of the finger, because we find that it is better to remove the
entire finger, either at the first joint, or even at the metacarpal bone
behind the first joint, than to leave a small portion of the finger before
it, for the stump is found to be extremely inconvenient, and to inter-
fere most unpleasautly with the motion of the remaining fingers ; do
not, therefore, amputate a finger at the second or third joint, unless
you are particularly requested to do so by the patient himself ; and as
this request may be made, I will show you the mode of performing the
operation.

AMPUTATION OF T HE FINGER AT T1IE SECOND OR THIRD

JOINT.

Having felt for the joint, you make a circular incision a little below
it, through the integuments ; this is the first step ; you then make a
cut through these at each side of the joints ; you then turn up and
back the flaps thus produced, when, upon dividing the ligament with
the scalpel at one side of the joint, you immediately open it, carry the
knife through and divide the ligament on the opposite side ; in this
way the finger may be removed ; the flaps you see are now laid over
the bone, and form a good stump. The French perform this operation



392 ON THE DIFFERENT AMPUTATIONS.

in a different mode, and in a way, I must say, not very anatomical,
for you know the construction of the phalanges is such that the upper
portion of the lower bone projects over the articulating surface of the
upper ; this happens both inside and outside the joint, so that if you
attempt to cut directly into the joint, you cannot do so in those parts,
for the point of your knife will rest upon the processes I have just
mentioned to you ; their mode is to bend the finger, and then make
a cut into the joint behind the process, and this in a finger that is not
diseased may be done; but, generally speaking, in diseased fingers the
joints cannot be bent; it likewise often happens that the joints them-
selves are diseased, when, of course, flexion would be exceedingly dif-
ficult, if not impossible.

OF AMPUTATION OF THE FINGER AT THE FIRST JOINT.

Now, gentlemen, in this amputation, the finger is drawn aside ; you
then make an incision obliquely through the web situated between
them, and carry your cut just beyond the knuckle; the knife is then
carried through the joint from side to side, leaving a flap of integu-
ment sufficient to cover the end of the bone: to say the truth, this
is not the best mode of amputating the finger ; it is better to make your
oblique cut through the web longer than I have just described to you,
so as to carry it beyond the joint some way up the metacarpal bone ;
you make a similar incision on the other side of the joint, and having
cleared the bone from its muscular and ligamentous attachments, you
saw through the metacarpal bone itself.

The two fingers which were next the diseased one now approximate,
and if kept in this situation until adhesion of the integuments has taken
place, very little deformity of the hand will be produced : if, on the
other hand, a portion of the finger be left projecting, the inconve-
nience of the stump will not only be felt in the motion of the fingers,
but a disagreeable deformity be obvious to every spectator : in the ope-
ration I have just shewn you, neither one nor the other will exist, com-
paratively speaking ; there cannot be, of course, any annoyance from
a stump, and the deformity will be scarcely observable : well then,
we seldom amputate the finger at the second or third joint, unless at
the particular desire of the patient ; neither do we recommend the ope-
ration at the first joint, but rather the one which I have just mentioned
to you, viz. that of sawing through the metacarpal bone a little way
above the knuckle. **

The next operation that I shall describe to you is the



ON THE DIFFERENT AMPUTATIONS. 393



AMPUTATION OF THE METACARPAL BONE OF THE THUMB.

To accomplish this operation, you must begin your incision by cut-
ting through the integuments at the inside of the thumb, nearly oppo-
site the first joint ; you carry this incision backwards to the union of
the metacarpal with the carpal bones ; this incision will form a flap,
consisting of integuments and the abductor muscles, quite sufficient
to cover the wound that will be occasioned by the operation. After
having completed this flap, the knife is then to be passed backward
from between the index finger and thumb as far as the trapezium, to
which bone the head of the metacarpal bone is articulated ; when you
arrive at this position, you are to turn the knife so as to make its
blade form a right angle with the incision just made ; you are then to
carry its edge through the joint, by which the ligaments will be
divided, and the bone is thus removed : the flap, you observe, that I
first left, and which is formed principally of the abductor pollicis and
the integuments, is quite sufficient to cover the wound. The meta-
carpal bone of the little finger is removed by nearly a similar operation.

You begin your incision at the web between it and the ring finger ;
carry down to the articulation with the unciforme bone, pass it through
the joint, and then let it terminate upon the outside of the metacarpal
bone, opposite the part where you commenced your first incision ; a flap
will be thus formed of muscles and integuments, in the same way as the
flap in the thumb operation ; straps of adhesive plaster are to be employed
for the purpose of keeping the edges of the wound in contact. The
vessels required to be secured in the operations for the removal of the
fingers, are the two digital arteries.

OF A'MPUTATION OF THE FOOT AT THE TARSUS.

The operation for the removal of the toes is so similar to that of the
fingers, that I do not consider it necessary to say much to you on that
subject. One observation, however, I will make to you, which is, that
a man who had been in the habit of removing fingers at the first joint,
and who had never removed a toe, or seen one removed, if he were to
conduct the operation in the same manner, as for the removal of a finger,
would feel himselfvery much puzzled; that is, if he expected to find
the first joint of the toes at the same distance from the web as in the
fingers. You must, in the toe operation, carry down your incision be-
tween the web for at least an inch and a half, before you will be oppo-
site to the joint: the other steps of the operation are the same as for the
removal of a finger. A new operation has of late years been proposed
for the amputation of the tarsus, by cutting through the joint, formed



394 ON THE DIFFERENT AMPUTATIONS.

by the astragalus and os scaphoides, and the os calcis, with the os cu-
boides. Having desired your assistant to draw up the integuments,
you make an incision from the bottom of the foot on one side over the
dorsum down to the bottom on the other side, leaving the integuments
of the sole of the foot undivided. Before you make your first incision,
you of course feel for, and correctly ascertain, the precise situation of
the joint; after the first incision has been completed, you are to bend
the fore part of the foot downwards, by which you stretch the liga-
ments covering the joint, and a slight touch of the knife will then enable
the instrument readily to pass between the articulating surfaces of the
astragalus and os scaphoides ; then, by cutting still farther downwards,
you divide the ligaments connecting the os calcis and os cuboides. You
are now to place the blade of your knife horizontally, and cut along the
bottom of the foot towards the toes, between the integuments and bones,
until you have cut a proper distance for obtaining a sufficient quantity
of integuments to form a flap for covering the end of the stump, which
is then to be adjusted neatly over the wound, and confined in that situa-
tion by straps of adhesive plaster. I have tried this operation, and do
not like it; the inflammation which generally results from it is exceed-
ingly severe, and the suppuration very extensive ; this may be accounted
for from so large a portion of articulating surface being exposed by the
operation. I am of opinion that it is much better to saw through the
bones than to perform this operation ; there will be much less inflam-
mation, much less suppuration, much less risk to the patient, and at
the same time a much greater chance that the integuments will unite
by the adhesive process. I would, therefore, advise you, when it is
practicable, rather to saw through the os naviculare and os cuboides than
to entirely separate these bones at their articulating surfaces ; indepen-
dently of the advantages which I have already mentioned to you ; the
last operation would afford the patient a better bearing for the body
than the former, as more of the foot will be left by it. Upon the whole,
then, I am positive that you will find the operation of sawing through
the bones more successful than that of removing the foot at the joint.

ON FLAP AMPUTATION OF THE LEG.

It is usually performed a little above the ankle joint, about two-
thirds of the length of the leg downwards ; it is performed with a view
of enabling the person to wear an artificial leg ; and in those indi-
viduals whose circumstances do not require them to obtain their food by
manual labour, it may succeed, and answer the object in view ; but for
those persons who, by their industry and muscular exertions, have to
obtain a livelihood, it does not succeed.



ON THE DIFFERENT AMPUTATIONS. 395

A man, a few years since, in Guy’s Hospital, requested me to am-
putate his leg a little below the knee, whose foot had previously been
removed a little above the ankle. As the stump was quite well, and
the man appeared in health, I really did not think him serious ; upon
finding, however, that he was so, I persuaded him against the measure,
and said to him, You had better

“ Bear those ills you have,

Than fly to others that you know not of.”

As he persisted, however, in requesting the operation might be per-
formed, his wishes were at length gratified, and he had the satisfaction
of showing to his friends his improved stump.

When the flap operation is to be performed, it should be done, as I
before stated to you, two-thirds of the leg downwards ; you push the
catling through the integuments and muscles of the back of the leg at
this part, and carry your incision downwards ; when you consider the
knife has passed sufficiently far, you are to make it cut its way out im-
mediately at the back of the leg, and let the termination of the flap be
of a semilunar shape ; it will then correspond to the form of the wound,
to which it will afterwards be applied, viz., the upper part of the stump.
A circular incision is now to be made over the leg, so as to meet the in-
cisions where the catling first penetrated, and you remove the limb by
sawing through the bones.

In addition to the objections I have already mentioned, there are two
others of very considerable importance : it does not heal near so well as
the common amputation ; from the constant re-action of the muscles of
the calf, the flap becomes drawn from the surface of the bone which ex-
poses it, and the stump usually ulcerates most extensively. We have
never seen, in our hospitals, that this operation has succeeded so well as
the one I shall presently mention to you, and, consequently, it has been
abandoned. There is another objection that I will mention to you
against its performance, which is, that if hemorrhage should occur when
the ligatures come away, it will be almost impossible to get at the ves-
sels so as to secure them ; and this arises from their becoming so deeplv
imbedded in the soft parts. Altogether, therefore, it is an operation
which it will be prudent in you to avoid performing.

Now, gentlemen, of

AMPUTATION or THE I.EG BELOW THE KNEE.

hirst let me mention a few rules for your guidance when you perform
this operation. In amputation below the knee, if its condition will
allow of it, the bone should be sawed through four inches below the



396 ON THE DIFFERENT AMPUTATIONS.



point of the patella ; when you cut through the integuments, your in-
cision should be made with a view of saving two inches of these for the
purpose of covering the stump ; the quantity, however, is to be regu-
lated according to the size of the limb; and, in accidents where the
parts have not been reduced by previous disease, four inches frequently
will not be found too large a portion. Your principal object, gentle-
men, should be to save integuments, and not muscle : to preserve
muscle for the purpose of covering the stump in these amputations is an
exceedingly false and injurious surgical principle; if you save muscle
as well as integument, retraction will take place, and the stump, conse-
quently, will not heal near so kindly as it would have done provided
you had only preserved integument.

Now, gentlemen, in holding the amputation knife, do not grasp it
thus with the entire hand, but take it rather between the finger and
thumb, so that the haft may freely play in the hollow of the hand, and
at the same time pass between the finger and thumb when the circular
incision is made : by adopting this method, you may make your first
cut in an easy and free manner, and obviate that stiffness which is some-
times observable even in experienced operators. I now hold the knife
in the manner described, and thus divide the integuments ; they have
two places of adhesion, viz., over the tibia, and over the fibula. Having
separated these and likewise the connecting cellular membrane, the skin
is now loosened to the extent of two inches, which quantity will be
quite sufficient to cover the stump. In amputating, I generally use but
one knife, so that I shall divide the muscles, interosseal ligament, and
periosteum, with the same instrument; I therefore commonly use, in
amputating the leg or ami, the catling only. Take care to divide the
muscles extremely well, so as to prevent any of the fibres being torn by
the teeth of the saw ; for they not only impede the action of the saw,
but render the operation painful and clumsy. Much is said about the
attention and ability of your assistant while amputating, and that it de-
pends upon him whether the bone be splintered or not at the time it is
sawn through, and likewise the hitching of the saw is attributed to his
awkwardness. Now, the fact is, so much does not depend upon the
assistant as has been asserted ; the assistant should merely allow the
limb to rest upon his hand ; he should neither depress nor elevate, but
quietly permit the position of the limb to be regulated by the operator,
and carefully keep it in that situation ; the hitching of the saw will then
be prevented, and the operator himself may avoid splintering the bone
by causing the oscillations of the saw to be short at the moment when
the bone is nearly cut through. The vessels to be secured in this
operation are the anterior and posterior tibial arteries, and some-



ON THE DIFFERENT AMPUTATIONS. 397



times the anterior and posterior interosseal ; in tying the posterior
tibia! artery, take care not to include in the ligature the nerve which
accompanies it. After having applied your ligatures, cut off one end
of each, and let the remaining ends hang out together at the bottom of
the stump ; straps of adhesive plaster are then to be applied over the in-
teguments, some longitudinally, and others perpendicularly, for the
purpose of making it circular. These longitudinal and perpendicular
straps should be secured in their situation by a strap applied over them,
and around the limb, so as to retain the first straps that were applied in
their proper situation. The cooler the stump is kept after the operation
the better ; there will be less danger from hemorrhage, and less chance
of the suppurative inflammation taking place ; the adhesive is what we
want, and this you will be most likely to obtain by keeping the stump
in as cool a state as possible ; no rollers are applied to stumps by
surgeons of the present day, no tow, no flannel caps, as there were
formerly.

Now, as to the time for removing the dressings : On the sixth day
you may take away one strap, for the purpose of permitting any pus
that may have collected to escape ; and on the eighth day you may re-
move the whole of the straps, substituting for each, as soon as taken off,
a fresh strap of the same kind of plaster : it would be the height of im-
propriety to take off at the same time the whole of the plaster at so
early a period, as it would probably destroy the whole of the adhesions
which had formed ; therefore, on the eighth day, when you remove each
strap of plastfer, put another in its place before you take off a second.

OF AMPUTATION OF THE THIGH.

To amputate above the knee requires but little art or anatomical
knowledge ; some degree of skill, however, must be practised in the
operation, if the surgeon wishes to have a good stump after it; the whole
art of the operation consists in making the incisions through the muscles
in such a manner as to prevent the stump from becoming of a conical
shape at a subsequent period. It is not always desirable to perform this
operation very near the knee-joint ; in fact, in many instances it is a
great fault to do so, but more especially when the knee is affected with
fungoid or scrofulous disease; and I will tell you why. Under the
tendon of the rectus muscle, for an inch and a half at least above the
patella, are situate a quantity of bursae mucosae, and if these be cut into
under any circumstances, when amputating, it is bad enough, because,
generally, most extensive suppuration will follow, which will protract
most materially the healing of the stump, and if you operate in con-

M M



398 ON THE DIFFERENT AMPUTATIONS.



sequence of a fungoid or scrofulous disease of the knee, and then
should cut into burs®, the chances are, that the disease would again
return in that part, and render another operation necessary. In the
operation above the knee, be careful not to make your circular incision
through the integuments lower than an inch and a half above the
patella.

Well, gentlemen, after having made the incision through the integu-
ments, and dissected them back as far as may be thought necessary for
the purpose of covering the stump, you are then to cut through the
superficial set of muscles. In dividing these muscles is the grand cir-
cumstance to be attended to in this operation ; and which circumstance
is to divide the muscles immediately surrounding the bone at least two
inches higher up than the spot at which you commenced your incision
through the superficial set of muscles ; this will prevent the formation
of a conical stump. The reason is obvious ; the external muscles being
cut longer than the deep-seated, an allowance is made for their retract-
ing ; when, therefore, they are drawn up to their fullest extent, they
are then of the same length as the deep-seated muscles, thus the end of
the bone, and consequently the entire stump will present to you a flat
surface. You will probably ask, why do not the deep-seated muscles
retract too ? The answer is, they cannot, from their intimate connexion
with, and attachment to, the bone. The principle in this operation is
to have the muscles the same length as the bone, without the necessity
of applying the bandage.

In dressing this stump it is generally advisable to apply a roller next
to the skin, in consequence of the spaces which exist between the mus-
cles at the end of the stump ; the ligaments are then to be placed at the
most depending part, and straps of adhesive plaster put on in the same
manner as for amputation below the knee.

In this operation it is generally necessary to tie three arteries — the
femoral, the profunda, and that branch which usually runs either in or
by the sciatic nerve, for the purpose of securing it, and the application of
a ligature here requires considerable care, for the want of which I have in
two instances known a ligature to have been put upon the sciatic nerve
itself. In the first case it was not attended by any evil consequences ;
but, in the second, violent spasms came on in the part ; they were af-
terwards diffused throughout the body, and ultimately proved destruc-
tive to life.

1 1 should be equally your object to heal this stump by the adhesive pro-
cess, as much as that of the leg ; but in applying the strap of adhesive
plaster, remember that if matter should form it will gravitate, and at



ON THE DIFFERENT AMPUTATIONS. 399

the lowest part of the stump, where the ligatures are hanging, you
should leave a small aperture to permit its escape.

[The learned lecturer performed each operation upon the dead sub-
ject in the different modes described in the course of the lecture.]



LECTURE L.

AMPUTATION OF THE HAND AT THE WRIST JOINT.

This operation is not unfrequently required, in consequence of exten-
sive laceration of the metacarpus. Before showing you this operation,
however, let me observe, that if any one of the fingers or the thumb re-
main, it is better not to amputate the hand, as a single finger is often
exceedingly useful after injuries of this kind. A boy in the other hos-
pital recently lost his thumb and three of his fingers by an accident, but
the fore finger remained uninjured : I amputated the other part of the
hand, leaving the fore finger, and you will scarcely believe how useful
he found this finger. It is a curious circumstance that it increased to a
size very considerably larger than that which the finger of a boy usu-
ally acquires ; you will see, from the cast which has been taken of it,
that it is quite as large as an adult’s. He used this remaining finger in
grasping and lifting bodies with singular dexterity. If the second and
third fingers be injured, their removal will leave the patient a portion of
the hand almost as useful as before. I was called to a man at Vaux-
hall, who, in shooting, had a portion of the middle and ring fingers car-
ried away. I took out both the metacarpal bones, and the remaining
part of his hand was extremely useful to him. Be not in haste, there-
fore, in such cases, to remove the whole of the hand.

In performing the operation at the wrist, you are first to feel
for the styloid process of the radius ; it is better to make a semi-
circular incision on the back of the wrist, and a similar incision
on the under side, so as to reach the styloid process of the radius, in-
stead of making at once a circular incision. (It is of importance that
sufficient integuments should be left to cover the joint completely) ;
then depress the hand a little, and cut through the transverse ligament
of the wrist. The operation is easily performed, and leaves a very neat
stump. The radial and ulnar arteries are the only ones which, in ge-
neral, require to be secured, the interrosseal not being of sufficient mag-
nitude to require securing. In tying the ulnar artery, be upon your
guard not to include the ulnar nerve, which is close to its side ; the ulnar
artery is close to the flexor carpi ulnaris, and the radial at the outer side
of the flexor carpi radialis.



400 ON THE DIFFERENT AMPUTATIONS.



AMPUTATION OF THE FORE ARM.

The amputation of the fore arm a little above the wrist is a very
dangerous operation ; 1 have known two instances, in which the fore
arm was amputated three or four inches above the wrist, which termi-
nated fatally. The objection to this operation is, that you divide a
great number of tendons situated in the fore arm, which suppurate after
the operation, and form extensive abscesses, which burrow along the
arm : tendons are exceedingly apt to slough, where matter has been
produced, and in this way occasion the destruction of life. It may be
said, that we also cut through some tendons in amputating at the wrist
joint ; this is true, but at the wrist joint they are so bound down by
ligaments that they do not suppurate after the operation ; there is skin
enough to cover the extremity of the joint, which unites by the adhesive
process. Such is the result of experience with respect to amputating in
this part ; if you are asked where you should amputate, you should an-
swer at one-third of the length of the fore arm in tracing it downwards.
In amputating the fore arm you may make a double flap ; one on the
inside, and the other on the outer side ; and this mode of operating is
often adopted. In sawing the bones, take care to saw both at the same
time. A very good stump is left in this operation : four arteries require
to be secured, the radial, the ulnar, and the anterior and posterior
interrosseal. .

The amputation of the upper arm is similar to the operation of
amputation above the knee: in the latter, however, it is necessary to
make three incisions, as I explained to you in the last lecture ; in am-
putating above the elbow joint two circular incisions will be sufficient,
one through the integuments, and a second through the muscles down
to the bone : having well freed the bone from the muscle, you will proceed
to divide it by the saw. The reason for this difference in operating is,
that above the knee you require a considerable portion of integument to
cover the stump ; in the upper extremity the muscles are more bound
down to the bone. In amputating above the elbow, the principal artery
which requires to be secured, is the brachial ; in securing it, take care
not to include the brachial nerve.

AMPUTATION AT THE SHOULDER JOINT.

The amputation at the axilla is a very simple operation : I may add
too that it is safe, for I do not think that this operation adds at all to
the danger of the patient, when compared with the amputation of the
upper extremity a little above the elbow. After amputation at the
axilla, the joint heals as well and as quickly as after amputation at the



ON THE DIFFERENT AMPUTATIONS. 401

middle of the arm. The readiness with which it heals will depend
upon the integuments being sufficient to cover the whole of the car-
tilaginous surface, and upon the constitution of the patient. If the
constitution of the patient be not good, there will be danger of sup-
purative inflammation. The first case in which I performed amputa-
tion of the shoulder joint was that of a woman in the other hospital, for
exostosis of the os humeri. To ascertain whether the swelling was of
an ossific character, I made a small incision through the integuments,
put down a probe, and felt the spiculae of the bone giving way. It was
of great importance to ascertain that the disease was not of a schirrous
or fungoid kind, for in that case it would have been useless to ampu-
tate. It was necessary in this case to make a double flap, by taking
out a portion of integument from the arm, as it was impossible to
provide a sufficient covering for the glenoid cavity from the deltoid
muscle. The second case in which I operated at the shoulder joint
was a curious and a novel one. It was that of a boy residing at Wor-
thing, who fell from a horse, and received a compound fracture at the
elbow joint, which rendered amputation necessary. It was an admir-
able stump, and the wound healed quickly. In a short time, however,
the boy began to complain of a great deal of pain at the extremity
of the stump ; a gradual alteration in its form took place, till it became
conical, and at length the bone projected through it. The boy was
brought to Guy’s Hospital, and on examination there was found, at
the extremity of the stump, a swelling on the inner side, which was so
excessively tender that he could not bear the slightest pressure. The
least pressure produced the most violent spasmodic affections of the
muscles ; these symptoms increased, the boy’s general health gave way,
and it became necessary to amputate the limb at the shoulder joint,
when we found the nerves forming the axillary plexus blended together,
and forming a large substance like a common ganglion. This had pro-
duced the tumour on the inner side of the arm, and the spasmodic affec-
tions of the muscles. Some time after a boy came into the other hos-
pital who had had his limb amputated below the knee. The operation
had been well performed by Sir Charles Blicke ; a good stump was
left, and the boy was discharged, as cured, from St. Bartholomew’s
hospital. Within a few months he came back, complaining of great
irritation at the extremity of the stump, which had become conical ;
the extremity of the bone was sawed oft’, and hg was discharged a second
time, apparently doing well. Soon after, however, the bone became
again conical, and extremely irritable ; he was brought into the other
hospital, where, believing that there might be a swelling at the extremity
ot the popliteal nerve, which produced effects similar to those in the

si si 2



402 ON THE DIFFERENT AMPUTATIONS.



former case, I made an incision into t.he ham, sawed off the hone at
the back part of the stump, aud removed a portion of the nerve, which
was swollen to the size of the extremity of the finger. Mr. H. Cline
has since removed a similar ganglious substance in a person whose
stump became conical, and extremely irritable. In all such cases it
will be right to saw off the bone so as to lay bare the extremity of the
nerve, and remove that portion which has become enlarged ; above the
knee the sciatic nerve will be affected ; below the knee the posterior
tibial. The French, in performing the operation of amputation at the
shoulder joint, make a flap before and behind the joint ; we do not do
this, but I do not mean to say that their mode is not quite as good as
ours. There is no necessity for the tourniquet in this operation ; a
finger may be put on the artery, while you are making the flap, but
even this is unnecessary, for all that is required is to divide the artery
last, and put your finger upon it at the moment of dividing it. Place
the patient in a chair ; slit up the deltoid muscle, and, introducing the
knife, make a flap from the head of the os humeri ; it is better not to
make the other incision through the integuments, until you have dis-
located the head of the bone from the socket. The next thing you have
to do is to cut into the joint, dividing the capsular ligament; the head
of the bone is easily dislocated from the socket. The next thing you
have to do is to cut into the joint, dividing the capsular ligament ; the
head of the bone is easily dislocated from the socket. Carry the knife
in a circular direction, and put your finger upon the artery while you
are turning the head of the bone from the socket. The axillary artery
is the only one which requires to be secured ; I have never known a pa-
tient die from the operation of amputation at the shoulder joint ; but I
have heard of cases in which the patient has died of hemorrhage caused
by sloughing of the artery some days after the amputation.

AMPUTATION AT THE HIP JOINT.

This operation has been several times performed, and in several in-
stances with success. I recollect the time when this operation was a
little criticised by surgeons, and I remember the following story being
told of Mr. Bromfield," who performed it. Mr. Bromfield was attend-
ing a nobleman, who observed that his hands were a little bloody ; this
led to some conversation about our profession, and Mr. Bromfield said
he had just been amputating a man’s thigh at the hip joint. — “ Good
God ! Mr. Bromfield (exclaimed the nobleman), how can you talk
of such horrible things ?” Three or four days after, the nobleman in-
quired about the patient who had undergone this operation, and Mr.
Bromfield replied, that he had lived forty hours after it. “ And was



ON THE DIFFERENT AMPUTATIONS.



403



that all (said the nobleman), after putting the man to such dreadful
agony?” The amputation at the hip joint, however, gentlemen, has
been so often performed with success, that it may now be considered as
one of the established operations of surgery. Mr. Brownley, a military
surgeon, first performed it during the late war : he did it without put-
ting any ligature on the artery in the first instance; it was only com-
pressed. Mr. Guthrie also performed this operation with success during
the late war. He also performed the amputation through the trochanter
major without securing the artery in the first instance ; I compressed the
artery myself in that case. The amputation at the hip joint has been
performed in the same way successfully by M. Larrey, and many other
surgeons ; but notwithstanding the great respect I entertain for these
authorities, I am disposed to think that the operation cannot be safely
performed without securing the artery in the first instance. When you
do not secure the artery in the first instance, what is likely to happen
is this : when you have to divide the femoral artery as near to Poupart’s
ligament as possible, and put a ligature upon it, the man becomes so
faint under the operation that he will be unable to support it. I have,
in such a case, been obliged to suspend it, to give the patient wine, and
chat with him, in order to rouse the vigour both of his body and mind.
The operation will certainly be most safely performed by tying, in the
first instance, the femoral artery under Poupart’s ligament, above the
origin of the arteria profunda. A question in the first place arises
whether we should perform the operation of amputation at the hip joint,
when it can be done through the trochanter major. I say, no. Unless
the disease of the thigh-bone extends quite up to the joint, as in the case
in which I recently performed the operation, it is undoubtedly better to
saw through the trochanter major than to cut the bone from the ace-
tabulum. When the acetabulum is laid open, great constitutional irri-
tation is produced by the suppurative process — abscess after abscess
arises, and the life of the patient is put into imminent danger. Though
this operation has been occasionally performed with success, I feel it my
duty to impress upon your minds most strongly the danger to which it
exposes the patient ; it occasions the most violent constitutional irrita-
tion, and reduces him to the lowest 1 possible state, so that he can with
difficulty recover ; whereas the operation of amputation through the
trochanter major is attended with very little risk. After the femoral
artery is tied, there is no difficulty in the future steps of the operation ;
a doubt may arise whether the femoral artery is laid bare above or
below Poupart’s ligament ; and to ascertain this, slit up the artery a
little, to see whether the orifice of the profunda is above or below. As



404



ON PILES.



you cannot form a very large flap on the outer side, the principal flap
must be made from the inner side. Pass your knife above the tro-
chanter major, along the muscles ; and, having made your two flaps,
the next point is to dislocate the head of the bone, which snaps as soon
as the ligament is divided.

The French operate with a very long knife, nearly as long as a
sword; they pass it down directly into the capsular ligament, until it
touches the head of the bone, carry it through the round head of the
bone, and, cutting through the muscles along the trochanter major,
bring it out at the back of the thigh.

(The learned professor performed the amputation at the hip-joint,
and the other amputations described in this Lecture, on the dead
subject.)

LECTURE LI.

In adverting to the subject of complaints in the anus, I have already
mentioned fistula in ano; I shall, in this evening’s lecture proceed to
the subject of

PILES.

Piles, which are complaints of very common occurrence, are, in the
first instances, an enlargement of the hemorrhoidal veins ; they are
either external or internal, and the treatment will be somewhat different,
according to the situation of the disease.

When a person applies to you with external piles, lie complains of
pain in passing his motions, and tenesmus after the discharge. On
examination of the anus, you discover a projection of a livid appearance,
which, in two or three days, becomes so solid as not to yield to pressure.
The blood is coagulated in the hemorrhoidal veins ; after a time, the
veins become inflamed, the patient feels uneasiness in going to stool,
and observes that his feces are tinged with blood. In a short time the
pressure of the feces on the internal part of the rectum brings down the
pile, so that it becomes external. The gut is brought down in this way
every time the patient has a motion, and he is under the necessity of
pressing upon the part for some time, in order to return the rectum
into its original situation. This is a great tax on his time, as well as
a cause of considerable suffering ; the bleeding is at this time very
considerable, and the discharge is attended with great irritability of
the rectum.

At length inflammation takes place, which adds greatly to the
patient’s suffering, and he is often unable to return the rectum when it










ON PILES.



405



has descended. A person is thus exposed to considerable inconvenience
and suffering from this complaint, and he is very anxious, after a time,
to have it removed.

Prolapsus ani is to be considered as the effect of internal piles. I
knew a person, who held a situation which required his attendance in
the early part of the day, who was under the necessity of rising at a
very early hour, in order that he might have his evacuation, and have
sufficient time to return the rectum. A piece of lint, dipped in oil,
should be applied, when a considerable bleeding takes place from the
pile or piles. There is sometimes a discharge of matter, and now and
then the piles become ulcerated.

With respect to the causes of this complaint, it sometimes arises from
costiveness, and the pressure of hardened faeces on the rectum ; and is
very often a consequence of long continued diarrhoea : so that, opposite
causes occasionally produce the same effect. It very often arises from
disease of the liver, and congestion of the veins in the intestinal canal.
The difficulty of transmitting the blood through the vena portae
occasions a congestion in the hemorrhoidal veins ; and obstructed
secretions in the intestinal canal lead to the same effect. It is a
very common consequence of phthisis pulmonalis ; the subjects of
that disease are very commonly, sooner or later, the subjects of in-
ternal piles, with prolapsus ani. When piles have existed for a con-
siderable length of time, excrescences are produced, in consequence of
inflammation.

There are three different states of the rectum under this disease ;
first, as it is affected by external piles ; secondly, by internal piles,
accompanied by prolapsus ani ; and, thirdly, by excrescences, which
are the remnants of the piles, and which possess a high degree of vas-
cularity. The mode in which these excrescences are produced is as
follow : — The inflammation of the pile glues the sides of the veins
together: adhesive matter is poured out, which becomes organised, and
a hard swelling, in which there is a number of vessels, is produced.
These excrescences project from the surface a little way up the anus,
which is chafed and rendered extremely irritable from this cause. Here
are preparations in which you will have an opportunity of seeing them
hanging in festoons several inches from the extremity of the anus.

With respect to the treatment of this disease, if you are consulted fer
external piles, and find a little vivid projection at the anus, which has
existed only for a short time, and yields readily to pressure ; you should
give some active aperient, avoiding carefully, however, any purgative
which has a particular influence on the rectum, as, for example, aloes.
\ ou should give castor oil, or sulphate of magnesia, with infusion of



406



TREATMENT OF INTERNAL PILES.



senna, so as to produce a copious secretion from the intestines. Saline
purges produce the greatest effect when you wish for a considerable
secretion from the intestines ; where you wish for a secretion of bile
from the liver, give the submuriate of mercury, or the blue pill, with
saline purgatives. In this way you relieve the veins of the intestinal
tube, and remove congestion. In addition to this you wiU apply leeches
to the swollen part; the best local application is the liquor plumbi
subacetatis dilutus. In this way you will generally succeed in getting
rid of the disease in this stage. If the pile has continued till it has
become solid, you will then pursue a different plan. Put the point of
your lancet into the pile, just puncturing the part, and squeezing it
between your fingers, you will press out a clot of coagulated blood.
When the pile has become diminished, and the vein ceases to be swollen,
the liquor plumbi subacetatis dilutus, with a purgative, will get rid of
the disease. So much for the treatment of external piles in their com-
mencement; the treatment of internal piles is more difficult.

ON THE TREATMENT OF INTERNAL PILES.

It requires a great deal of experience in many cases to enable a
surgeon to make up his mind as to the best treatment of particular
diseases, and I will state to you the result of my experience on this
subject.„Al am going to make some confessions, but I have not the
slightest objection that they should be made known to the world, because
they mayiprove useful to others.

Internal piles commence by a sense of weight and pain in the sacrum ;
you are seldom consulted, however, until the disease shows itself by
prolapsus ani. As a prolapsus ani is entirely the effect of the piles,
this effect will scarcely cease, unless the causes of it are removed. You
may diminish it in some measure by astringent applications, and it is
right to try to do so, but you will seldom ultimately succeed. With
this view, when the part has descended, you may use a decoction of oak
bark and alum, injecting into the rectum (with a common gonorrhoea
syringe) two grains, which may be increased to four grains of alum in
an ounce of the decoction of the oak bark. But this treatment will
seldom avail when the disease has advanced to any considerable extent;
the only way of effecting a cure, in such cases, will be to remove the
piles ; and the question then arises, how they may be best removed,
a question which experience can alone solve. I usetj, to think the
removal of the piles by excision the best mode, because I found the
pain produced by it very trifling, as compared with the ligature, and
the prolapsus very easily cured in this way.

I remember a case of a major in the army, who had prolapsus from



TREATMENT OF INTERNAL PILES.



407 '



interna] piles, and who suffered so much when the piles were tied, that
he could not submit to this operation : but upon cutting them off with
a pair of scissors, the pain was so trifling, that he thought nothing
of it.

If I had never met with any adverse circumstances, I should still
recommend the removal by excision ; but I must now state the reverses
which have occurred to me in this mode of practice ; thesereverses I feel
it my duty most candidly and openly to declare to you. A gentleman
from the East Indies placed himself under my care with internal piles,
which I removed with the scissors. A very few days after he com-
plained of pain by the side of the rectum ; an abscess formed under the
gluteus muscle, which discharged abundantly ; his constitution was
already broken, and he died in consequence of the discharge. Consi-
dering this to be merely a case of bad constitution, which might not
apply to any considerable number of cases, I did not give up a practice
which I had hitherto found successful, in consequence of a circumstance
which I regarded as accidental.

Five years ago a nobleman applied to me with internal piles. I was
upon my guard in this case, and said I did not like to remove the piles
without a consultation. A consultation was held, and the removal by
excision was agreed to ; I accordingly removed them, and he was well
in a very few days. Two years after, he sent for me again, and said
that he had some more of these piles with prolapsus ani, and that he
wished me to cut them off again ; I did so, and as I advised the recum-
bent posture, he went immediately to bed. As I was anxious about
this patient, I did not immediately quit the room, but stood chatting
with him for a short time, when he said, I believe you must quit the
room, for I must have a motion. I went out of the room, and upon
returning shortly after I found him trying to get into bed, and upon
looking into the vessel I perceived a considerable quantity of blood in
it. In a few minutes after, he said he must have another motion, got
out of bed, and again discharged a considerable quantity of blood.
This he did four different times ; one of the hemorrhoidal arteries in the
centre of one of the piles which had been removed was divided, and as
1 was determined he should not die of hemorrhage, I said I must se-
cure the vessel which bled, and with a speculum ani I opened the rec-
tum sufficiently to see the bloodvessel, took it up with a, tenaculum,
and put a ligature round it. On the following day I found the patient,
who was much advanced in years, extremely weak ; he had had a se-
vere rigor, he grew gradually worse, and in four days after he died. On
examination of the body there appeared to be some slight disease of the
intestines, but not sufficient to account for death ; he was seventy-four



408



TREATMENT OF INTERNAL PILES.



years of age. A person from Jersey or Guernsey was attended by

Mr. for piles ; Mr. removed them with a pair of

scissors, but did not see him on the following day. I was informed
that he was exceedingly ill, and the next morning when I went to see
him, he told me, as well as he could, that he was almost dead ; and
that he had an evacuation of such a quantity of blood as could scarcely
• be believed ; on the following morning he died. The last case with
which I shall terminate this sad catalogue, is that of the wife of a me-
dical man in the country, who came to London with three piles. They
were accompanied with some irritation, and I only removed one of them.
There was no hemorrhage, but three days after she complained of a good
deal of tenderness in the abdomen, and I was quite sure there was peri-
toneal inflammation. The symptoms increased, and on that day week
she died. On examination I found the peritoneum much inflamed ;
she had the appearance of one who had died of puerperal fever. I have
felt it my duty to state to you the consequences of performing the ope-
ration of excision for internal piles, in order to impress on your minds
that it is safer to treat such cases by a ligature than by excision. The
application of a ligature, however, is exceedingly painful, if it be drawn
tightly ; it should only be applied so as to interrupt the circulation,
and destroy the life of the part, without exciting much. pain. Leave the
ligature on the part, but if the pile be of considerable size, as the liga-
ture is apt to slip, more especially if the peduncle be large, a straight
needle, threaded with a double ligature, should be passed through the
centre of the pile, and tied on each side. This will excite little pain,
and prevent the ligature from slipping off; the time in which the liga-
ture comes away is from five to six days. A patient will come to the
hospital, have the ligature applied, and walk away after it is done ; it is
most prudent, however, to remain for some time in the recumbent posture
after the operation. This very morning a gentleman had the ligature
applied, and thought so little of the operation that he would not go
home to lie on his sofa, as I advised him. It must not be concealed that
even the application of a ligature has been known to destroy life. Mr.
Cruikshanks applied a ligature to an elderly gentleman from the coun-
try : the ligature produced gangrene, which extended beyond it into the
rectum, and of this gangrene the patient died. Even this simple operation
is not unattended with danger, if the patient neglects himself. He should
keep the recumbent posture, and remain as quiet as possible, so that the
circulation may not be hurried. Both excision and the ligature, there-
fore, will occasionally destroy life ; but I am quite satisfied from expe-
rience, that, upon the whole, the ligature is most safe. This is the
advantage, gentlemen, of having lived beyond the middle period of life.



TREATMENT OF INTERNAL PILES.



409



A young man may have been in the habit of removing piles by exci-
sion ; he may do this twenty times with success, and consequently be-
lieve that the operation is perfectly safe. At length he meets with dis-
appointments similar to those of which I have enumerated four instances :
he will then retrace his steps, and consider whether he has been pursuing
a right system — whether, upon the whole, some other plan may not be
preferable, and his experience will teach him that the ligature is de-
cidedly the safer operation. But there are other circumstances to be
attended to in the treatment of this disease ; internal piles are accom-
panied with a high degree of fever ; they are covered with adhesive
matter surrounding the rectum, and the sphincter ani is affected with
spasmodic symptoms. Ought you, under such circumstances, to purge
the patient very freely ? Certainly not. Apply leeches, fomentations,
and poultices to the part, and take blood from the arm ; for exciting the
intestines to action adds so much to the irritation, that if you venture to
purge the patient once, he will not be able to bear it a second time.
You must endeavour to allay the irritation by local and general treat-
ment; if the inflammation continues for a considerable time, you must
give an aperient once in three or four days, but it must not be oftener
repeated. Sometimes internal piles undergo a natural cure. A cele-
brated literary character, to whose case I before alluded, who was under
the necessity of rising at an early hour in the morning to perform his
evacuation, became, at an advanced age, the subject of inflammation of
the rectum. The result was, a loss of power in the part ; he was for a
week in the greatest possible danger, but at the end of that time the
piles separated by sloughing, and he got entirely rid of the disease.
Nature teaches us the mode in which we should proceed in cases of
excrescences, which, as they merely form portions of projecting skin,
may be removed without the least hazard. When you see at the anus
portions of skin, which are the remnants of piles, exceedingly vascular
and irritable, they may be removed by excision. I remember Dr. Fox
had a patient who suffered exceedingly from this cause ; the part was
excoriated ; he had constant tenesmus, and he had taken a great quan-
tity of medicine without benefit. I snipped off the excrescences with a
pair of scissors, and the patient was immediately relieved. As the pro-
lapsus remains for some time after the removal of the piles, the best
treatment is to inject astringent lotions into the intestine, and to apply
the unguentum gallae to the part. If the prolapsus is obstinate, you
may make a little incision by the side of the sphincter ani, with a view
of producing the adhesive inflammation, so as to glue the rectum to the
cellular tissue surrounding it. This cannot, however, be done without
danger in certain constitutions.



H N



410



ON NASAL POLYPI.



OF POLYPI OF THE RECTU3I.

Before I quit this subject I should observe that polypi sometimes
spring from the rectum. Most mucous surfaces produce polypi, and
the rectum among others. There is a preparation on the table exhibit-
ing a polypus in the rectum ; there is one in the college, exhibiting a
polypus in the internal surface of the bladder. These appearances may
excite your surprise when you meet with them, and I think ic right,
therefore, to describe them to you. They generally occur in children,
and very rarely in adults. The most advanced age in which I have met
with them is twenty-two. The child, whose case I described to you,
who sat upon a needle which entered the bladder, and formed the nucleus
of stone, had a polypus which extended for a considerable length up the
rectum. Its mother found something red descending, which was found
to be a polypus, reaching three inches in length up the bowel. It was
extremely vascular, of the same sizethroughout, and of a florid red colour,
having nothing of the character of a pile. I found it hanging down from
the centre of the anus, and on taking hold of it I drew down the rectum
by it. This was the first case of the kind I had seen ; I had never
before heard of the disease. The child was brought to my house, and on
drawing down the rectum, I removed the polypus with a pair of scissors.
While I was at lecture, a person came from an inn in the Borough,
where the parents of the child were staying, and told me that the child
was bleeding very much. I requested Mr. H. Cline to go to the inn,
who found that the bleeding was inconsiderable, and the child did ex-
tremely well. The way in which 1 have since removed polypi has been
by drawing them down so as to bring into view the part of the rectum
from which they spring, and, when this part is brought into view', to
put a ligature round them, and remove the part below the ligature with
a pair of scissors. I have seen in the course of my life ten cases of this
kind, most of which occurred in infancy : two of them occurred at the
age of puberty. I shall proceed with the subject of polypi in the en-
suing lecture.



LECTURE LII.

The first subject for our consideration this evening will be
POLYPI OF THE NOSE.

There are four different species of nasal polypi, the first and most
common of which is the



ON NASAL POLYPI.



411



GELATINOUS TOLYTUS.

Polypi of this description grow from a narrow peduncle, are com-
posed of a very soft substance, resembling jelly (hence their name), and
are very slightly vascular ; the second kind is the

HYDATID POLYPI.

These are formed by a collection of hydatids, and have the appear-
ance of bags or bladders of water ; with these there is generally a co-
pious serous discharge ; the third are the

CARCINOMATOUS POLYPI.

These have similar symptoms and appearances to scirrhous tumours
in other parts of the body, are painful at intervals, ulcerate, and, during
this stage, occasionally bleed ; the fourth and last kind is the

FUNGOID POLYPUS.

These are the four different species of polypi of the nose. Now,
gentlemen, I shall first describe to you the

GELATINOUS POLYPUS.

It is yellow and semi-transparent, very thinly streaked with vessels
which are never sufficient to give it a red appearance. It hangs from
the schneiderean membrane by a small peduncle, therefore loose in the
nose, and if you stand opposite the patient, and he draws in and
forces out his breath through the nostrils, you will then be enabled to
see it advance, and again retreat to the posterior nares. The large size
of the polypus, however, will often prevent this free motion. It generally
has its origin in the middle chamber of the nose, between the superior
and inferior turbinated bones. Here is a preparation (showing it to
the class) in which you see it growing from the side of the antrum.

Polypi of the nose of this description often acquire a very consider-
able magnitude. When this is the case they extend into the posterior
nares, and often hang over the edge of the velum pendulum palati, so
that you can frequently see them at the back of the mouth ; and, if
they are not quite so large as to allow of this, they may be distinctly felt
on passing back the finger. Two of the largest of this kind of polypi
that I ever saw were from Sudbury in Suffolk. Here is one of them :
it is of a size which rendered its removal by the forceps impossible ;
here is another preparation in which you see it extends through the
velum, and here are others of a smaller size belonging to the same
species. It not unfrequently happens, when their removal is attempted



412



ON NASAL POLYPI.



by the forceps, that they will become broken, and some little address is
often requisite to prevent this difficulty ; they are firmly attached to
the pituitary membrane of the nose, and unless the points of the forceps
are applied near their bases, you cannot expect to be successful in ex-
tracting every part of them ; consequently, they will again form, and
the operation be again required. When you happen to pull away,
along with the polypi, portions of the bone and membrane, you destroy
the sources whence they originate, and in such cases prevent their
return.

Now, gentlemen, the remedy for these polypi is extraction by means
of forceps. Those generally employed are long, and have small points,
the insides of which points or blades are made rough to prevent their
slipping from the peduncle, and thereby losing their hold ; the manner
of using the forceps is this : I pass up a probe in a direction between
the superior and inferior turbinated bones, and feel for, and ascertain the
precise situation of the peduncle ; I give the probe the direction which
I have just stated to you, because I have invariably found these polypi
springing from the middle chamber of the nose. I have never known
one of them arise from the septum narium. Well, having satisfied my-
self of the situation of the peduncle, by means of the probe, then let it
remain as a director for the forceps, and having carried the points of
the forceps to the peduncle, thus guided by the probe, seize the pe-
duncle and tear it off by a sudden jerk of the forceps : by adopting this
mode polypi may be effectually removed. Always take care to lay
hold of the peduncle, for, if you do not, and, on the contrary, grasp
the body or end of the polypus, you will then break it off, and the in-
troduction of the forceps will be again and again required. Using tile
probe as a director will be found a great assistance ; as the forceps are
immediately conveyed by it to the peduncle. I just now said that the
polypus should be torn off by a sudden jerk : this is of importance, and
you should keep it in your recollection. If you remove the polypus
by gradual efforts, that is, by gradually withdrawing the forceps, you
will not accomplish that which ought to be your object, viz. preventing
the return of the disease ; by a sudden jerk you are often enabled to tear
away a portion of the pituitary membrane, and even the bone itself to
which the polypus may be attached. By this you succeed in destroy-
ing the source from whence it sprung, and effectually obviate a repeti-
tion of the complaint ; always recollect therefore to use a jerk, and not
pull the forceps gradually.

If the person should be very young, and the nose small, you may re-
move the polypus with a pair of forceps similar to such as are contained
in our common pocket instrument cases ; indeed such are the forceps



ON NASAL POLYPI.



413



which I often employ for the extraction of nasal polypi ; if, however, the
polypi should grow far back, you then will succeed best with the forceps
I first mentioned.

Sometimes I take away polypi by merely using a pair of probe-
pointed scissors. After cutting through the peduncle, if you desire the
patient to blow his nose, the air will force it out of the nostril ; but I
should tell you, that when thus removed, they are more likely to return
than when extracted by the forceps, because you do not with the scis-
sors take away, as with the forceps, the pituitary membrane, and this is
the source whence these polypi spring.

But, gentlemen, polypi not unfrequently extend into the posterior
nares, even back as far as the spine, in which situation you may not only
often feel them with the finger, but, when of this magnitude, frequently
see them ; these polypi must be removed by a pair of forceps exceed-
ingly curved ; their curve should describe at least half a circle, the
curve of course being of such a size as to admit its free introduction into
the mouth, these forceps should be passed to the back of the mouth,
then their points or blades, are to be carried up the posterior nares,
when, having satisfied yourself in the manner before directed that you
have hold of the peduncle, you are to break it off by moving the forceps
in a direction downwards and backwards. Another way, when the po-
lypus is large, and when the peduncle grows from the side of the antrum,
is to divide it by means of a pair of curved scissors, and then with your
finger hook down the polypus at the back of the mouth, from over the
velum pendulum palati; in this way it falls into the throat, and pro-
duces a sensation of choaking ; retching is the consequence, and the po-
lypus will be thrown upon the floor before you. Mr. Ring, a surgeon
of Reading, had a patient with a polypus of this kind, removed in the
manner 1 have just mentioned to you ; it was a very large one, and when
I first went to Reading, I put a ligature upon it, but this did not prove
of any use, it only succeeded in getting away a small portion of it, the
root was not removed; the polypus soon became again as large as ever;
and I am now of opinion, that a ligature in these cases should never be
applied.

If, after the operation has been performed, you think any portion oft
the polypus remains, you should, by means of a probe, pass up a piece
of lint to the spot, to prevent any annoyance from hemorrhage ; the lint
previous to its introduction may be dipped in a solution of alum ;
indeed, where patients have objected to have the polypi removed
by the forceps or scissors, it has been recommended to use injections of
solutions of alum, or the oxymur. hydrarg.

Tile next species of nasal polypi which I shall describe to you, is the

N N 2



414



ON NASAL POLYPI.



HYDATID POLYPI.

These are generally found in young people. The first case of the
kind that I ever saw was in this hospital; the subject of it was a young
girl about sixteen years of age ; when Mr. Cline attempted to remove
it, it burst, and there escaped a small quantity of watery fluid ; upon
pressure being then made at the side of the nose, another burst, until at
length bladder after bladder burst, and the whole were discharged. It
was thought at the time the complaint was cured ; in a few weeks, how-
ever, it again returned, arid again was discharged. Since that time I have
seen several similar cases. The peduncle of the hydatid polypus re-
sembles the cord formed from the placenta; it is composed of thin fibre 8
or films, which form the covering of the polypus, and these converge to
complete the peduncle. The best plan of treatment that can be pursued
for the cure of hydatid polypi, is daily to touch them with the muriate
of antimony ; this can easily be done by means of a camel hair pencil ;
a very few times will be sufficient ; it acts chemically on the polypi,
and quickly destroys them. It may be supposed that this strong appli-
cation would hurt the nose; this, however, is not the case; but care should
be taken to confine its application to that part only where its use is
required.

The third species that I shall mention is the

CARCINOMATOUS NASAL POLYPI.

These are commonly met with in old people ; they are usually attended
with severe pain across the forehead, in the situation of the frontal

sinuses the passage of the air through the nose becomes obstructed

from the size of the swelling — the tumour also presses upon, and occa-
sionally obliterates, the lachrymal sac, preventing the natural course of
the tears, thus giving rise to the inconvenience and symptoms of fistula
lachrymalis. I have known the pain in the nose in these cases exces-
sive ; the pain is not constant, but occasional — and then dreadfully se-
vere ; at such times there is more or less hemorrhage, and this ulti-
mately affords the sufferer a temporary cessation of his misery. In
these complaints, I am sorry to be obliged to say, that nothing can be
done except of a tranquillising nature ; the belladonna and opium may be
introduced ; also the conium, with a view of affording ease ; and, if the
inflammation should be severe, you may apply leeches in the vicinity of
the nose, together with evaporating lotions.

As regards internal remedies, these are likewise to be merely of a
palliative nature ; opium is the principal medicine given with this view,
and it answers the purpose well ; you are therefore to give opium in such



ON NASAL POLYPI.



415



quantities as shall have the effect of lessening the dreadful pain ; by
this means you smooth the path to death, and I lament being compelled
to state that, if you succeed in this, you will achieve all that medicine
can accomplish. The fourth and last species I have to describe to you
is the

FUNGOID NASAL POLYPUS.

There is a case of this kind at present in the other hospital. The first
case of this description that I saw was in a young gentleman seventeen
years of age ; the particulars I will briefly mention to you. The father
of this youth called at my house with him, for the purpose of inquiring
what was to be done. At the time I saw him, there was a bleeding
from the part, and this I understood from the father frequently hap-
pened. The parent asked me if I would remove the tumour, and I told
him yes. This I did by ligature, but much sooner than I expected ;
for as soon as it was applied, the tumour dropped into my hand, the
silk having completely cut it through. There was slight hemorrhage
afterwards, which was easily subdued, by plugging the nostril with lint.
Shortly after the operation he left London for Portsmouth. The disease
soon returned, and was again removed by Mr. Copland Hutchinson.
Subsequently to this it re-appeared, and ultimately the patient was de-
stroyed. After his death, the body was examined by Dr. Mac Arthur,
and he found that the tumour had very extensive attachments ; that its
base was extremely broad and diffused. Now I had previously thought
that the disease had been confined to a single spot, or I certainly should
not have attempted its removal. I therefore recommend you not to
extract these polypi by the forceps : excise them with scissors, or de-
stroy them by ligature ; their extensive adhesions will, in either case,
render the operation unavailing and ineffectual; and what is still worse,
will do injury, by exciting irritation, whereby the disease will become
aggravated. In such cases I shall in future try what effect will be
produced by the muriate of antimony. But the disease may extend so
tar up the nares as to affect some other part of still greater importance
than in the place where it originated — thus the cribriform plate of the
ethmoid bone may become destroyed, and afterwards the brain itself par-
take of its malignant influence. Well, though there can be no hope of
the diseased person ever getting cured in such cases as these, yet it may
happen that, by judicious treatment, the incdnvcnicnce of the malady,
together with the deformity it occasions, may be materially diminished ;
but to produce a cure under such untoward circumstances would be im-
passible.



416 ON DISEASE RESEMBLING POLYPUS.



ON DISEASE HE SE MB LI NO POLYP0S, IN CHILDREN.

Before quitting this subject, gentlemen, there is another occurrence
connected with it, which 1 wish to mention to you, it is this — You
will often have children brought to you by their parents on account of
supposed polypi of the nose ; when you examine the children, you will
probably find in their nostrils red projections, the appearance of which
might have deceived you as well as the parents, had I not mentioned
the matter to you. Be assured, when you observe these red projections
in the nostrils of young children, that they are not polypi : the disease
is merely an enlargement or thickening of the pituitary membrane, and
if you try to remove or draw them away by means of the forceps, you will
probably tear off a portion of the turbinated bone : the forceps must not
be applied in such cases ; such a practice would be exceedingly im-
proper. What you are to do is this : Touch them by means of a small
bougie, formed of nitrate of silver ; from this application they will in
a short time turn white, and very soon disappear altogether. You may
rely upon it, that this is the only treatment required in such affections,
and there is no necessity for submitting these poor little delicate crea-
tures to any other operation.

The next subject for our consideration is

ENLARGEMENT OF THE TONSILS.

Children will be brought to you with swellings in their throats, and
it will be stated that they have great difficulty of breathing, sleep with
their mouths widely distended, the skin at the same time being covered
by a profuse perspiration. Upon feeling the throat, looking into the
mouth, or passing back the finger, it will readily be ascertained that one
or both tonsil glands is enlarged. The complaint is generally the re-
sult of one of the diseases common to children, as the small-pox or
measles, and the inflammation which produced it of the scrofulous kind.
Sometimes the enlarged part is attached to the gland by a distant small
peduncle : at other times the base of the swelling is of considerable size.

CONSTITUTIONAL TREATMENT OF ENLARGED TONSIL GLANDS.

To prevent the growth of these enlargements, and their formation
altogether, the best medicines that can be given, for the accomplish-
ment of these purposes, is the oxymuriate of mercury ; and it will be
found highly advantageous to combine it with the tincture of bark and
rhubarb. I usually prescribe it thus : —

j^,. Oxymur. Ilydrarg. gr. j .

Tiuct. Cinchon.

Rhei, iia. jj. M.



ENLARGEMENT OF THE TONSILS.



417



I order a tea-spoonful to be taken in a little white wine, twice or three
times a-day, according to the age or peculiar state of the patient.
Having already on several occasions explained to you the manner in
which small doses of mercury act on the system in chronic inflammation,
by restoring the secretions, it cannot be necessary for me to again dilate
upon that subject. By uniting the mercury, as above, with bark and
rhubarb, you will improve the appetite, strengthen the stomach and
bowels, and gradually restore the vigour of the constitution. It is not
of any great consequence what particular tonic you employ, should
there be any objection to those I have just mentioned. Indeed, in very
delicate children you will find it prudent to often vary the medicine ;
and a very beneficial one may be found composed of two grains of
rhubarb and five grains of carbonate of iron. Your own judgment will
direct you in what manner the medicines should be regulated.

LOCAL TREATMENT OE ENLARGED TONSIL GLANDS.

The application of the nitrate of silver will often succeed in getting
rid of these tumours ; you are to press down the tongue with one finger,
then holding the nitrate of silver in its ivory case, between the finger
and thumb of the other hand, gently apply it to the surface of the
swelling ; the application may be repeated, if necessary : where the
caustic is applied, the part will soon become white, and scale off. A
succession of these, produced by a succession of applications, will often
effect a cure.

The sulphate of copper is sometimes used instead of the nitrate of
silver, and succeeds very well. Alum is likewise a good application,
but it requires to be applied a greater number of times than the lunar
caustic; where, therefore, no inconvenience would arise to the patient
or practitioner from distant residence, or other circumstances, it may
be used with advantage ; and, as an internal remedy, a medicine formed
of the extracts of stramonium and conium ; but I have never known it
prove effectual, at least not entirely so. Well, then, when they are too
large to admit of cure, by the plans already described to you, or when
they resist the proposed methods, you are to remove them by ligature ;
it is easily applied, and may be done by first passing it through the eye
of a probe, then carrying it over the tonsil, and bringing it out below ;
tie u in front of the diseased gland ; you must of course previously give
to your probe the requisite curve: if your finger should not be suffi-
ciently long to make the knot, you should then use what is called the
tonsil iron, an instrument well adapted for the purpose, and would do
much better for performing the operation altogether than either the
probe or finger. The operation occasions very little pain or incon-



418



ON HARE-LIP.



venience. I have had a child, seven years of age, come to my
house, have a ligature thus applied, and afterwards walk back to
Islington.

If the tumour is not of that form which will admit of a ligature
being put on in the way mentioned, you must then pass the ligature
through the centre of the swelling, by means of a needle, and tie it
above and below ; in this case your ligature must, of necessity, be
double: in this way you will succeed, as effectually as with the other
mode, in producing'a separation of the enlarged part.

I shall now, gentlemen, describe to you the

OPERATION FOR HARE-LIP.

The name of this disease originated from a supposition that it
gives to the lip the same appearance as the lip of the animal bearing
that name.

Hare-lip is sometimes single, that is, the fissure being only on one
side; sometimes double, a fissure being then on each side, and occa-
sionally attended with a want of teeth in the upper jaw ; also a loss of
the velum pendulum palati and uvula. Sometimes in the double hare-
lip the only thing between the fissures is a small projection of cartila-
ginous substance attached to the tip of the nose ; the soft palate, in
these cases, is generally wanting, and the turbinated bone exposed.
The deformity in these instances is most unsightly.

In the operation for the removal of hare-lip, the simple principle is
union by adhesion or first intention. In single hare-lip you must
perform the operation thus. [Here the learned lecturer shewed the
operation on the dead subject, according to the description given.]
Pare off the edge of the divided lip on each side by means of a small
bistoury : in executing this step of the operation, take care that you
cut off enough, for immediately at the margin the parts are hard and
callous, and will not readily unite. Well, having pared off a sufficient
quantity of both edges, all that remains to be done is to apply the
ligatures, of which there are to be but two ; this number will be found
quite adequate. Now it is of great importance that you should be
careful where the ligatures are applied, and I advise you to be particular
in your adoption of the rules which I give on this point. Well, then,
introduce one ligature immediately at the edge of the lip, that is, at
the lowest part of the divided portions where the red part or line of the
lip begins, and the other ligature is to be introduced exactly midway
between the first and the extent of the wound towards the nose ; thus
the last ligature will be situated half way between the angles of the
wound, at the lower part, and the fissure at the upper. As your object



ON HARE-LIP.



419



should be to cause the edges of the wound to unite as soon as possible,
any thing calculated to retard that effect should be studiously avoided ;
and, as wax is known to have a tendency to induce suppuration and
ulceration, it should not be rubbed over the ligatures. Again the
ligatures should not be too delicate, that is, not too thin ; if they are,
the lip might be cut through by them.

In performing the operation for hare-lip, there will sometimes be
considerable bleeding from the superior labial artery. There will not
be any necessity for applying a distinct ligature to the vessel, because
you can easily tie the ligature at the angles of the lip in such a manner
as shall compress the artery, and stop the bleeding. It is very improper
to put a ligature on the vessel, as it interferes with union by adhesion :
from its producing suppuration, the pus, of course, would form between
the edges of the wound. On the fourth day after the operation, the
middle ligature may be removed, and on the fifth or sixth, the other.
In this respect, I am merely speaking of what generally may be done ;
as regards the time of removal, you must be governed by the state in
which you find the parts : if adhesion had not taken place, it would not
be proper to take away the ligatures on the fourth or fifth day, and you
should wait a short time longer. Instead of silk ligatures, silver pins
used to be employed for holding together the edges of the lip ; these,
most properly, have been relinquished : it is true they answered very
well, as far as keeping the edges of the integuments in apposition was
concerned ; but the great objection to them was, that when on the
fourth or fifth day you endeavoured to take them out, the difficulty of
withdrawing them often occasioned the adhesions which had been
formed to be completely torn through, and your operation so far de-
feated : the pain which the extraction of the pins produces is consider-
able, and the adhesions are frequently broken from the resistance,
struggles, and cries of the child. Now, as regards the silk ligatures,
you have merely to divide them by a pair of scissors, and the ends can
be displaced without using the slightest force.

When the edges of the lip have been brought together, and the sutures
applied, no after-treatment will be necessary, excepting what I have
already communicated to you ; you must not apply poultices, as they
would give rise to the suppurative process instead of the adhesive. Your
best plan will be to let the blood remain over the wound; let it clot
there, and not sponge it off". This will be the best bond of union, and
the adhesions which take place under this seldom give way.

Another point for our consideration, is the age when the operation
ought to be performed. Should it be attempted on very young infants,
or should we wait until a more advanced period ? To this question, an



420



ON HARE. LIP.



answer is easily given ; and I reply, never operate on very young infants,
but defer it until the completion of dentition. In very early life, there is
always great danger from operation ; and several infants, within my own
knowledge, have died in convulsions, after the operation for hare-lip.
Some years since, when I was at Yarmouth, I was told of a case that
had terminated fatally : convulsions carried off the infant a few days
after the operation. Not the slightest blame was attributable to the
practitioner : experience had not then established the propriety of de-
laying the operation till a more advanced age. 1 was once asked, if I
would operate on a very young infant, for hare-lip, whose parents re-
sided in Fenchurch-street? I replied, Yes; and shortly after went and
did it. I promised to call on the fourth day, but received a message,
saying that it was not necessary for me to dose, as the child was dead.
Some years ago a gentleman from Suffolk brought his infant to town to
undergo the operation ; it was performed ; pins were employed. Two days
after the operation diarrhoea came on; on the day following it was so
excessive that the pins were removed ; at the expiration of two other
days the child was carried off. A woman once brought her infant to
me on a Monday morning for the purpose of having it operated on for
hare-lip. I completed it, and directed her to bring the child again on
the following Thursday ; she came, and told me the infant had died.

Now, if parents should urge you much to perform the operation on
very young infants, explain the danger which attends it in very early
life. Tell them of its fatal results ; when, should they still press it,
the blame will be on them, and not you. Children when so very young
are not competent to undergo operations, and you ought not to perform
them for hare-lip unless the children have reached the age of two years.
After that period they possess some degree of strength, and are much
less disposed to irritation and convulsions.

I have still to mention the operation required for double hare-lip. It
has been recommended to cut away that portion of skin which sometimes
exists between the two fissures. That, however, is not the best plan ;
indeed, it is a very bad one. Always allow that portion of skin to re-
main, you will find it a great support, and of considerable utility in
rendering the operation perfect. Therefore you are to pare the edges of
this portion of skin in the same manner as you were directed in the first
operation. But you must not, when a hare-lip is double, operate at
both sides on the same day. You must let one side get well, and then
you may operate on the other. It now and then happens that the jaw
will project very much in these cases, and will sometimes even shoot
forward, and be attached to the tip of the nose. When the jaw does
project, the deformity may be very much diminished after the wounds



ON CANCER LABII.



421



have quite healed, by binding, on the most prominent part, a flat piece
of lead, inclosed in lint; it may be readily confined to the situation by
tape or black ribbon carried round the back of the head. When at-
tached to the tip of the nose it should be separated from that part, and
the operations then performed as before, that is, one deferred till the other
is well ; and the deformity will be removed by adopting the method just
mentioned.

We sometimes perform an operation on the under lip similar to the
one I have described to you for single hare-lip, in consequence of

CANCER LABII.

Which disease generally arises from the use of a pipe, and the manner
in which it happens is this : — the adhesive nature of the clay of which
the pipe is made, causes it to adhere to the lip ; at length the cuticle
becomes torn off, and the continued irritation frets the sore into true
cancerous disease. I am quite sure that it is produced in this way, for
I never saw the disease in the upper lip more than once. That the
disease is of a scirrhous nature, even at the beginning, any surgeon
must be satisfied : it is hard, has a bleeding surface, everted edges ;
and, as it proceeds in its destructive course, communicates disease to the
glands ; there is likewise felt in it, at particular periods, the most dread-
ful pain. I have seen in these cases all the foregoing real cancerous
symptoms. ,

An operation for the complete removal of the disease is the patient’s
only real hope of succour. The oxyde of arsenic is said to have cured
the disease — to have completely eradicated it. I can state, however, that
this application (as well as others of a similar nature) has, by its irrita-
tative qualities, produced a rapid disease of the glands, shortly after
having been applied to the ulcer on the lip.

In removing the disease with the knife, you should make an opening
in the lip, similar to what has been advised in single hare-lip ; that is,
it should be a triangular portion of the lip, including the disease entirely
cut out ; the integuments can then be easily approximated, and kept
in their proper situation by as many ligatures as the size of the wound
shall seem to require ; generally speaking, two will be found quite
sufficient. In removing cancer of the under lip, you divide the in-
ferior labial artery; and you stop the hemorrhage by adopting the
same method as was recommended in the hare-lip operation. Before
we part, I must entreat your patience, while I describe to you, the
disease called



o o



422



ON TIC DOULOUREUX.



TIC DOULOUREUX.

It is a dreadfully painful affection of the nerves of the face, but of
what nature is difficult to say : the nerves in this disease are not in an
inflamed state most certainly, for under the most horrid suffering they
are found of a natural colour; the nerves are not increased either in
their usual size, but, on the contrary, are found to be rather diminished.
Mr. Thomas dissected a gentleman in whom the sub-orbilar nerve had
been affected, and the nerve on that side was found considerably less
than the nerve of the opposite side. Again, I think the disease to be
one of diminished action, rather than of increased ; and it has been
found that stimulating, exciting medicines, are more beneficial than
those of an opposite character.

The pain experienced by those afflicted with tic douloureux is, I
believe, indescribable — it is of the most acute and distressing kind —
I have seen it cause the tears to trickle down the cheeks of a fine
old weather-beaten naval officer — a man who had fearlessly faced the
cannon’s mouth. After I had once divided the nerve for this com-
plaint, I asked the lady who had been the subject of the operation,
which gave her the most pain, the division of the nerve, or the dis-
ease ? “ Oh,” said she, “ the operation is a bed of roses in comparison
with the agony occasioned by the disease.” I was atone time visiting a
patient afflicted with it, in company with Mr. Row, of Burton Crescent,
when the pain absolutely was so severe, that it caused the person to roll
out of bed, and fall on the floor at the time of our being in the room.

It is in general like the pain of electricity — patients will exclaim,
“ Oh ! I had a shock at that moment.” It produces a kind of flicker-
ing through the nerves ; its motions are like summer lightning, and
the pain cannot be compared to any thing more appropriate than to
the horrid sensations created by electric shocks.

Treatment of Tic Douloureux . — The principal relief has hitherto
been derived from operations, and these operations have consisted in
dividing some of the nerves of the face ; the division of the diseased
branch will, at least generally, succeed in keeping off the pain for
the space of three or four months, about which time it appears that
the nerve either re-unites, or that its branches anastomose with others.
If you ask patients if they will submit to an operation, they answer
“ most certainly — to any thing that will rid us of our present suffering.”
If they enquire of you whether the operation will be attended with
permanent benefit, you should say that it is doubtful, but you ratlie t
think not. Indeed, the result of the operation is doubtful enough,
for the pain will sometimes return almost immediately, but whether



ON TIC DOULOUREUX.



m



by the same nerve is questionable. A person came several time3 from
Bury to undergo the operation, and the pain used to return before
sensation ; that is, a numbness of a part of the cheek and upper lip
would still continue, notwithstanding the pain was as severe as ever ;
the divided nerve in this case wa3 the sub-orbitar; well, then, the divi-
sion of the nerve does not always succeed in giving relief so long as
one might have expected. If it should be deemed requisite to divide
the sub-orbitar nerve, it should be done a quarter of an inch below
the orbit; the nerve passes out of the foramen half an inch below;
so that you are to divide it mid-way between the foramen and the edge

of the orbit if you divide it lower than this, you will leave some

branches which still continue the disease ; the proper mode to adopt
for dividing it is to introduce a sharp-pointed bistoury at the distance
from the orbit already stated ; and, carrying the point of the instru-
ment close upon the bone, you hook up the nerve on its edge, then
press upon the skin over the edge with your finger, and at the same
time withdraw the knife through the opening by which it entered ; in
this way as you take out the knife the nerve will be divided; you
ought to ask the patient if he feels a numbness of the upper lip, and
if he should not, your operation will be incomplete. When necessary
the supra-orbitar branch is to be divided in a similar manner, by
introducing the knife under the integuments of the superciliary ridge,
and cut through the nerve immediately as it emerges from the supra-
orbitar foramen, carry the point of the knife from the nose outwards.

When the submental nerve requires division, you need not make
any incision through the integuments, but may perform the operation
by placing the knife within the mouth, and directing its point down-
wards, to the mental foramen, where the nerve passes out, and by
gliding the knife along the bone at that part, the nerve is sure to be
divided ; in performing this operation, you may direct your knife by the
bicuspidati teeth, the anterior maxillary foramina being just below
them.

The best medical treatment of tic douloureux, with which 1 am ac-
quainted, is the exhibition of the carbonate of iron. Mr. Hutchins, of
Nottingham, has published a work on the disease now under considera-
tion, in which he speaks strongly in favour of the above medicine : it
certainly is an admirable remedy — and the profession is much indebted
to Air. Hutchins for having recommended it. I may here remark, it is
much to be regretted that country practitioners do not more frequently
publish the result of their observations and experience ; much valuable
knowledge is lost to the world from their neglect of this important
duty.



424



ON AURA EPILEPTICA.



In speaking of the carbonate of iron, and of medicine in general,
when given for the cure of tic douloureux, it cannot, of course, succeed,
should the disease be otherwise than functional ; if it should be caused,
as in the case of Dr. Pemberton, for example, (who suffered more, pro-
bably, than any other human being from this malady,) by a piece of
bone projecting into the brain, medicines will prove utterly unavailing,
as regards cure ; and temporary ease is all that can be afforded.

Five minutes more, gentlemen, and I have done.

ON AURA EPILEPTICA.

A man was sent to me by a surgeon of Watford having this disease ;
he would be occasionally seized by a severe pain in the thumb, which
gradually extended up the arm, in the course of the radial and brachial
nerves, through the axilla to the neck ; his head would then become
twisted, and in a moment he would drop on the floor in a fit : shortly
afterwards he would get up, and appear as well as ever. I cut down
upon the radial nerve by the side of the flexor carpi radialis longus
tendon, exposed about an inch, and cut out five-eighths of it. After
this the pain entirely left him, and he returned to Watford, where he
remained, completely cured.

Gentlemen, I am very sorry for having detained you so long. ( Ap-
plause. )



LECTURE LIII.

ON POISONS.

Poisons are those substances which, in small quantities, produce
deleterious effects on the human body. Though this is considered the
best definition of poisons, yet there is no substance considered as poi-
sonous, which in very small doses is not capable of producing a bene-
ficial effect. Several of the poisons, indeed, in minute and well regu-
lated doses, produce the best possible effects — arsenic is an example of
this.

Poisons are derived from five'sources, viz. : there are those from the
animal and vegetable kingdom — there are the mineral and chemical
poisons — and another furnished by man himself, is called morbid
poison.

You will find such a difference with regard to the effects of morbid
poisons, when compared with the others, that you will speedily relin-
quish any opinion you might have formed respecting a supposed reci-
procity of action between them.

In tracing the operations of poisons, we find some of them affect the



ON POISONS.



425



vascular system, others the nervous, while many poisons affect both the
nervous and vascular systems at the same time. In looking at poisons
from many animals, for example, we find the first action in the arterial
system, while the influence of others evidently begins in the nerves. The
poison communicated by the viper and rattle-snake attacks the arterial
system first ; that from the bite of a rabid animal, influences the nervous
system first; but ultimately in these cases both become affected : thus,
then, some poisons first affect the nervous system, others the arterial,
and others both.

With regard to the vegetable poisons — all of these act on the nervous
system : persons who have been destroyed by these poisons, have been
said, upon examination after death, to have had inflammation of the
inner coat of the stomach, because in some instances the vessels have
been found larger and more filled with blood than in others. These
appearances, however, are common in cases of sudden death, where there
has been congestion of the vessels of the stomach. These appearances
are not the effect of inflammation, they have nothing of the character of
inflamed mucous membranes, and are entirely destitute of that vivid
redness which ever accompanies the latter. No ; the influence of vege-
table poisons is directly on the nerves ; and, in the next lecture, I will
show you a curious experiment with one of these poisons, when you will
have an opportunity of seeing an animal taking food almost at the very
moment of its death ; the dissolution of the animal will occur in a very
few minutes after the introduction of the poison under the skin ; so that
the shortness of the time in which the effect is produced, will show the
impossibility of its having been the result of inflammation. Thus, gen-
tlemen, will vegetable poisons destroy life by direct influence on the
nervous system, without giving rise to the slightest inflammation.
Mineral poisons destroy, some by arterial, and some by nervous influ-
ence ; but those which are most commonly taken, are arsenic, muriate of
barytes, and oxymuriate of mercury, and each of these produces violent
inflammation. With regard to arsenic, it has a direct influence on the
nerves as well ; and all of you must have seen it produce the most pow-
erful convulsions immediately after it has been taken. In those who
have been destroyed by lead, no appearance of inflammation has been
found in any part of the body, no such mark either in the stomach, or
any portion of the intestinal canal ; the inner coat of the stomach in
many of these cases appearing less vascular than usual, which evi-
dently proves that death is not produced by inflammation in this
part, but that it is the result of a direct influence of the poison upon
the nerves.

The action of morbid poisons are various, some being on the arteries,

0 o 2



426



ON POISONS.



some on the nerves ; in typhus fever, more commonly called gaol fever
(which arises from the number of persons crowded together rendering
the air impure, and unfit to sustain the vigorous actions of life;) the
first effects manifest themselves in the nervous system, producing great
depression of the mental and bodily powers, through which, ultimately,
the persons are destroyed. It renders the patient, at an early period of
the complaint, incapable of being roused, so great is the depressing in-
fluence of the nerves.

Many of the morbid poisons act directly on the arterial system ; as,
for example, small-pox : here inflammation is first produced, which is
succeeded by fever, the suppurative process, considerable local irritation,
and the secretion of matter capable of propagating the disease ; other
morbid poisons, as measles, for example, first affect particular parts,
and afterwards the entire system : in measles we first see the conjunc-
tiva inflamed ; then the mucous membrane of the nose becomes affected,
producing an increased secretion of that part ; then the trachea and
bronchia become similarly influenced, and at length the lungs, giving
rise to a troublesome cough, and about that time the fever occasioned
by the disease becomes general throughout the system. The affection
of measles is so easily communicated, and the infectious matter so
subtle, that it readily floats in the air, and is of so infectious a nature,
that it generally runs through entire towns and villages, where any por-
tion of the children become affected by it ; the air is likewise capable of
communicating the disease to the inhabitants of distant parts. But the
most infectious of all the diseases with which I am acquainted, is that
called mumps. If this disease makes its appearance in a school, more
than half the children will become affected by it. I was some years ago
attending a patient at Hackney with Mr. Toulmin, at a school where
there were more than sixty scholars, some of whom at the time were
afflicted with the mumps. At a subsequent period, I inquired of Mr.
Toulmin how many of the scholars had been attacked by it ; and he in-
formed me, thirty-six or thirty-seven ; so that it had attacked consi-
derably morethan half.

Poisons diminish in effect by repetition ; opium, therefore, if given
for any considerable time, will lose its influence, if the quantity be not in-
creased. Now morbid poisons, by repetition, likewise lose their influence.
It very rarely happens that any gentleman passes through his appren-
ticeship at the hospital without being affected with the hospital fever,
and it not unfrequently happens that the first attack is fatal, and more
particularly so to young men who are fresh from the country, who have
been accustomed to a fine wholesome air : it generally commences by
headache, and which is succeeded by fits of shivering. If the fever



ON POISONS.



427



should attack the individual a second time, which it seldom does, it will
be slight, and its effects insignificant, compared to those in the first in-
stance. The same thing happens in scarlatina, the fever being much
less the second time than the first ; the inflammatory symptoms in such
cases are mitigated, and much less severe. In vegetable poisons, the
effects upon the body are generally proportioned to the quantity of poi-
son taken ; not so, however, with morbid poisons, for no particular in-
fluence is manifested, whether the quantity inserted be large or small,
whether the point of the knife be loaded with the poison, or whether it
be slightly touched with it; its effects depend upon the state of the con-
stitution at the time the poison is introduced ; its action is modified by
the peculiar condition of the patient, and not upon the quantity of the
poison. In opposition to this result, Dr. Fordyce believed that, if the
poison were diluted, its influence would be much less severe; accord-
ingly he tried some experiments, attempting to prove this, and ex-
ceedingly diluted the poison with water; the effects, however, were
precisely similar to those excited by the poison in its concentrated
state ; he therefore relinquished the opinion as untenable. This, then,
is a remarkable difference between vegetable and morbid poisons ; the
first produces effects in proportion to the quantity taken, whereas, in
the latter, the quantity of poison makes no difference in its particular
specific action ; but this is regulated by the peculiar condition of the
patient. Whether morbid poisons be taken from the dead or the living,
their influence appears to be the same ; a medical man, whom you all
respect very much, inoculated his child for small-pox with matter taken
from a subjeet in the dissecting-room ; this was exceedingly wrong,
such matter ought not to be made use of; and I merely mention this
fact to you for the purpose of showing that the virus, under these cir-
cumstances, will produce the disease, and even in its mildest form, for
the child of this gentleman did extremely well, and had the disease
favourably.

Now, as to the time when the influence of vegetable and animal poisons
begins to show itself, there is likewise a very great difference; the most
powerful of the vegetable appearing, in many instances, almost imme-
diately (however, in this respect, there is some variety) ; whereas the
symptoms arising from morbid poisons are often protracted to very dis-
tant periods. In natural small-pox the disease generally appears four-
teen days after the infection has been received; in inoculated small-pox,
about the tenth day ; the cow-pox, the ninth or tenth ; in scarlatina,
die seventh day, but I have known it show itself on the third day. I
knew a lady whose family was exposed to the infection of scarlatina ;
the disease appeared in one of her children at the end of three days, in



428



ON POISONS.



another on the fourth, in another on the fifth, and, in herself, at the end
ot three weeks or a month. I knew another child in whom the disease
did not appear until the expiration of seventeen days.

The measles usually appear from seven to fourteen days after infec-
tion, but generally about the eighth day : it is quite right that you
should be acquainted with these particulars, for parents will think little
of you if you are incapable of answering such questions. Well, then,
natural small-pox about the fourteenth day ; measles from the seventh
to the fourteenth ; and scarlatina about the end of a week.

If children have imbibed the infection, it is wrong to prepare them for
the consequences ; for where children are so treated, they are invariably
worse. With respect to scarlatina, the less the fever is which attends
the disease, the greater I consider the danger to be from the local conse-
quences, after the specific malady has terminated.

I will now say something of individual poisons. First, I must ob-
serve, that there is a remarkable difference as to the time when the
effects of morbid poisons begin to be manifested ; in some instances
twelve months have been known to elapse after the insertion of the poi-
son, before the symptoms appeared. Dr. Babington published a case in
the Medical Researches, where he stated that the symptoms were not
apparent until the three hundred and sixty-fourth day after the insertion
of the poison. Even the effects of marsh miasmata do not, in some in-
stances, show themselves for some months after the infection has been
received. A lady went into the country in August, having with her two
children and two servants. The part of the country in which they re-
sided during their absence was damp and boggy ; she returned again
the following October : at Christmas the youngest child was attacked
with an intermittent fever, and a few days afterwards the same disease
appeared in the person of the eldest daughter ; in succession the two ser-
vants, likewise, had it. Well, then, here was an example in which the
seed of an intermittent fever had been sown more than two months be-
fore the symptoms were apparent.

Those persons who have had ague, and who are subsequently assailed
by fevers, or even the slight fever attending a cold, will have it assume
a typhoid character ; what I mean is, that fevers in those individuals
who have had ague will generally be of a typhoid nature.

I will now speak more particularly of

ANIMAL POISONS.

The Wasp and the Hornet . — The sting of the wasp and the hornet
gives rise in many cases, to very great pain and severe inflammation.
The best application to mitigate the effects of those stings, is composed



ON POISONS.



429



of one drachm of opium rubbed down in an ounce of oil : put some of
this on lint, and lay it over the wound, occasionally changing it ; at the
same time youshould keep the bowels open by aperient medicines. The
poison communicated by

The Bite of the Viper not unfrequently proves destructive to life; it
has both a nervous and arterial influence. A gentleman who was once
in company with me on a shooting excursion, upon seeing a viper on
the side of a bank, struck it with the butt-end of his gun, and supposing
that he had killed it, put his hand towards it, for the purpose of taking
it up ; the reptile, however, was not dead, but had merely formed itself
into a coil, and sprang upon the gentleman’s finger ; he instantly sucked
the wound, and shortly afterwards his tongue become paralyzed, and for
a time the faculty of speech was entirely lost : this clearly shows that
the poison of the viper has a direct influence upon the nerves, and that
it affects the vascular system, is also equally evident, for, in the case of
this gentleman, the inflammation of the finger was very great, and ex-
tended up the arm even to the shoulder : by taking aperient medicines,
and the application of poultices, this gentleman ultimately recovered.

There was a man some time since admitted into this hospital in con-
sequence of the bite of a viper ; the power of speech in this patient had
but imperfectly returned, after a lapse of six months from the infliction
of the injury. When I was formerly trying some experiments in com-
parative anatomy, I was anxious to see what effects were produced upon
living structure by the poison of vipers ; and, with a view of ascertain-
ing, I confined a rabbit and viper together, and, by irritating the viper,
induced it to bite the ear of the rabbit : the wounded ear soon began to
droop, as did also the other ear shortly afterwards : the animal was soon
seized with convulsive motions, which were quickly followed by death.
Upon dissection, the part which had been bitten wa3 quite black, and
the cellular tissue on that side of the animal where the wound had been
given, after the skin had been stripped off, appeared to have been disco-
loured by extravasated blood. A rattle-snake, that was confined in a
cage, some time since, bit a man in the finger; the patient was attended
by Sir Everard Home; the inflammation rapidly extended up the arm,
and to several parts of the body ; abscesses were produced, and, after
languishing several days in great suffering, the patient died.

Treatment of the Bite of Vipers . — I tell you what I once did for
myself, when I met witn an accident of this kind, whilst trying the
experiments to which I have just now alluded. Among others I was in
the habit of freezing reptiles : you all know that a frog may be frozen sq
completely, that, by slightly pulling the legs, the joints will crackle and
break ; yet, by the application of gentle and well regulated heat, the



430



ON POISONS.



muscles of the animal, upon the melting of the blood, will begin to
tremble, and soon regain their natural functions ; and a few minutes
after having been apparently dead, and converted into a solid piece of
ice, the animal will be seen hopping about the room.

Vipers also may be frozen, and will regain their actions in a similar
manner. On one occasion, after having taken a frozen viper out of the
freezing mixture, and not suspecting that it had so quickly regained its
natural state, I was bitten by it on the back of the hand ; this happened
one evening at lecture ; and the late Mr. Fox, the dentist, who was pre-
sent, and at that period a pupil of mine, at my desire, immediately
excised the wound by means of a lancet, and I applied a bandage
tightly round the wrist for the purpose of preventing absorption, in case
any of the poison had remained. This treatment completely succeeded,
and not a single bad symptom followed the injury. This is the plan,
then, that I always advise you to pursue in cases of this kind : cut out
the part which has been stung, and apply a ligature above the wound,
if the situation will admit of it, with a view of preventing absorption. •
With respect to the poison of rabid animals producing the disease called

Hydrophobia , and which disease is so different in its character, so
opposed to those arising from any of the other poisons, so marked in its
nature, so horrid in its effects, that upon seeing it you could not hesitate
to form a correct opinion as to the nature of the malady. The first
symptom a person experiences who has been bitten by a rabid animal,
is pain in the injured part ; and this is usually felt from the third to
the fifth week. The next symptom is a sense of chilliness, succeeded
by rigors and heat ; then a difficulty of swallowing is felt, not of liquids
in particular, but of any substance : this arises from the constriction of
the muscles of the pharynx ; and so violent are the spasms of the throat
that, upon offering the patient any thing to swallow, you would think it
would directly occasion suffocation ; he will desist from the attempt,
and tell you he will try again by and bye ; upon again applying the cup
to his lips, he will be seized with the most horrid shuddering, turn
away to avoid the sight of what he was about to take, and sit down in
a state of exhaustion. It has been said, that persons having this disease
bark like a dog; this is not true, as the noise is occasioned by violent
inspirations ; whereas the barking of a dog is the effect of expiration.

In hydrophobia there is generally extraordinary irritability. I have
seen two or three examples where the slightest touch of the bed clothes
would produce a sudden impetuous passion ; and in two children whom
I have seen, they would beat away the bed clothes, and could not suffer
them to cover their bodies. If you direct a patient having hydrophobia
to go into a warm bath, he does not object, but will tell you he will try ;



ON POISONS.



431



upon approaching the water, however, and putting in his foot, he will
immediately jump, and tell you he cannot enter the bath. By per-
suasion, they have afterwards plunged in, when the violence of the
convulsions were such, that, if not immediately removed, they would
have been drowned. Allien in the bath, even the slight waves striking
against the neck give rise to the most dreadful spasms ; and in one case,
when the patient was in the bath, and the medical attendant dashed
some of the water against his face, he exclaimed, in great agony, “ Oh,
don’t ; that is cruel — that is too bad : I cannot bear it.” I mention
these circumstances for the purpose of showing you, that in hydrophobia
there is a great excitement of the nervous system ; and it is quite
erroneous to suppose that all the symptoms of the disease are produced
by inflammation. In hydrophobia and tetanus the symptoms very
nearly approach, yet in the two diseases there is a very great difference.

On the dissection of those who have died of hydrophobia, there has
been found inflammation of the internal surface of the pharynx ; the
mucous and muscular coats of the stomach similarly inflamed, and the
muscular fibres of the latter in a state of violent contraction, the con-
tents of the stomach not digested. Now, these appearances are not
sufficient to account for the symptoms, and the cause certainly resides
in the nervous system. He who supposes, therefore, that the disease
depends upon inflammation, and treats it by bleeding, does not entertain
correct views of the disease ; he is quite mistaken in its character. Two
or three cases were treated by copious venesection some years ago in the
East Indies ; the symptoms, however, were not those of hydrophobia,
but of inflammation of the oesophagus. A man, some years ago, in the
other hospital, had symptoms resembling hydrophobia ; he never had
received a bite ; and, upon examination after death, the (Esophagus
situated behind the heart was found to be greatly inflamed ; the
symptoms were not those of hydrophobia, but of inflammation of the
oesophagus.

I advise you, gentlemen, to read the paper which I before alluded to,
published by Dr. Babington, in which a complete history of the disease
was given ; and you will there see that the loss of blood does not
tend, in the slightest degree, to relieve the malady.

The two first cases that I saw were treated by bleeding ; the loss of
blood reduced the strength, but did not mitigate the symptoms ; on the
contrary, 1 think the irritability was increased from the weakness which
the venesection occasioned.

A rabid animal will at first lap fluids, but cannot take solids ; will
throw his meat among the straw, and bite at every thing near him ; his
master will take his food to him, who will be treated by the animal at first



432



ON POISONS.



in the customary manner ; as the disease advances, however, the respect
and attachment to the master becomes lost, and the animal will bite
him likewise. After lapping a little water, the dog will take hold of
the vessel between its teeth, and then dash it to the ground ; thus it
will be observed that the natural character of the animal remains for a
long time unchanged. A gentleman living in a village had a pointer
with this disease : he behaved as well as usual in the field ; would
stand, back, and bring the game ; but, after the sporting was over, he
would bite any animal that came near him, and at length ran entirely
away. Upon examining dogs that died of this disease, there has been
slight inflammation observed upon the internal surface of the stomach
and pharynx, a sort of efflorescence ; and all human beings who have
died with this disease have been said to have had, more or less, a similar
appearance. A few words on the

Treatment of Hydrophobia . — The best mode that can be adopted is,
immediately after the part has been bitten, to cut it out ; you should
first ascertain at what depth the teeth have entered, by means of a probe,
and then take care to excise a sufficient quantity, and leave no part of
the injured integument, cellular membrane, or muscle, to remain. If
persons should object to the use of the knife — foolishly object to have
the poisoned part cut away — I advise you in such cases to let sink into
the wound a small piece of the potassa fusa ; this will readily dissolve,
and, becoming liquid, its cauterizing influence will be communicated to
each part of the wound, and thus destroy the influence of the poison. The
best plan decidedly is the immediate excision of the part, and, where
it has been done directly after the injury, it has, I believe, in every
instance, been successful in preventing the disease; if this practice
should be opposed, the next best plan is the employment of the potassa
fusa : I am speaking of these means, you will observe, as preventives,
and as for medical remedies, when the symptoms of hydrophobia have
once appeared, I am not acquainted with any. Every medicine, I be-
lieve, has been tried over and over again, and all have been found alike
ineffectual ; the only thing in the way of medicine that I think calcu-
lated to do good, is that which has lately been adopted in France, viz.,
the injection of warm water into the veins. To make the employment
of the remedy safe, however, and to prevent pressure of the brain, the
same quantity of blood as the water to be injected should be previously
abstracted. With this precaution, I think the remedy a very proper
and feasible one. I may here remark, that the blood need not be ab-
stracted before the injection of the water, but may be let flow from one
vein while the water is thrown in at another, and this probably would be
the better plan.



ON POISONS.



433



LECTURE LIV.

OF VEGETABLE AND MINERAL POISONS.

It remains that I should say that a few words on the subject of vege-
table and mineral poisons. One of the vegetable poisons is hemlock ;
I have not myself seen any instance of its proving destructive to life ;
the common effects, which it produces are giddiness, vomiting, and very se-
vere pain in the head. The effects of this poison are known rather from
history than from any recent observations which have been made with
respect to it. The Greeks were in the habit of putting to death, by this
poison, persons who had forfeited their lives to their country ; and it was
by this poison, as most of you are aware, that Socrates was destroyed.
It does not appear from the accounts which history has transmitted to
us that Socrates suffered much in his last moments, since we are told
that, during the time he was drinking the hemlock, he said a cock
should be sacrificed to YEsculapius for the ease with which he departed
life. Tobacco is a highly poisonous substance, though it is rarely given
in such quantities as to prove destructive to existence. I have known
it, however, destroy life, both when used as an injection and when ap-
plied externally. I will mention a circumstance which occurred to me,
in order to put you upon your guard with respect to the use of tobacco
enemata. I witnessed an instance of this some years ago in the other
hospital, in a young woman who had strangulated hernia. A drachm
of tobacco in a pint of warm water was injected into the intestines, to
assist in diminishing the strangulation. There were no previous symp-
toms which led me to suppose that the patient was near her dissolution,
but soon after the injection was administered she became exceedingly
depressed, a deadly paleness overspread her body, she had a cold per-
spiration, vomiting increased to a great degree ; soon after she became
insensible, and in that state died. This was not more than three quarters
of an hour after she had taken the tobacco enema. On this account I
mentioned to you, when I was on the subject of hernia, that it was dan-
gerous to use this substance without feeling your way in its employment.
It is better not to inject at first more than half a drachm of tobacco in
half a pint of water ; if the patient should not be affected by this quan-
tity, another half drachm may then be employed. I am aware that two
drachms or more are sometimes injected without any bad consequences,
but this is in cases where the patient has considerable strength of con-
stitution. \\ here the constitution is delicate and weakly, even a drachm
of tobacco used in an injection will sometimes prove destructive to life.

I shall now mention to you another circumstance respecting the ex-

r r



434



ON POISONS.



ternal application of tobacco. The mother of a boy, who was the sub-
ject of tinea capitis, having heard that tobacco was the best remedy for
this complaint, went to a tobacco dealer, and bought some tobacco juice,
which, as I afterwards learnt, is prepared in the following way :

A quantity of moist tobacco is placed between two rollers, and very
strongly pressed, so that the juice exudes ; and, in this way, an extract
of tobacco is produced of the very strongest kind. It is used for the
purpose of destroying insects, and it is also employed in eruptive com-
plaints of sheep and other animals.

The woman put this preparation on the head of the boy, at one
o'clock in the afternoon : very soon after he became pale, and exceed-
ingly sick. Feeling that purging was coming on, he went to a necessary
at the back of the house, where he staid so long that liis mother went to
look after him, and found him with his clothes unbuttoned, sitting in
an almost insensible state, with his head resting on his shoulder. He
had had a copious evacuation into his clothes ; he was carried up stairs,
put to bed, and at four in the afternoon he died. A surgeon in the
neighbourhood hearing of these circumstances, communicated them to
me. I attended for the purpose of examining the body, and did not
find any appearance of disease. There was a little effusion of fluid be-
tween the scalp and the bone, but none in the membranes or ventricles
of the brain. If tobacco be introduced in any quantity into the stomach
of animals, it kills them very quickly, by putting a stop to the action
of the heart. The oil produced from tobacco, by burning it, is highly
poisonous ; it destroys, if administered in very small quantities. With
respect to its introduction by smoking, I have never known an instance
of death being produced by it in this way.

Opium, administered in considerable quantities, destroys life, by pro-
ducing apoplectic symptoms. The first case of the destruction of life
by opium, which I had an opportunity of witnessing, was one in which
the person was suspected of having committed a murder. He was seen
at a great distance from the spot where the murder was committed, very
shortly after the crime was perpetrated, but it appeared that he had
ridden with extraordinary speed ; his horse was excessively heated. It
was proved that he had passed through a particular gate, soon after
the murder, and other strong circumstances of suspicion concurred, so
as to leave little doubt of his guilt. Finding that he was likely to be
brought to trial on this charge, he determined to destroy himself, and
for that purpose he took a quantity of solid opium. The quantity
which he took was not exactly ascertained. At twelve o’clock in the
day he had apoplectic stertor ; on putting a candle to his eye, the pupil
did not contract, and he was in a state of insensibilty. Attempts were



ON POISONS.



435



made to produce vomiting without success, and at nine o’clock on the
following morning he died. On examination of the body after death,
the stomach appeared to be very much reddened, and a considerable
quantity of solid opium was found in it. In all cases of violent death
from opium, a reddened appearance of the stomach will be found. 1
do not, however, believe that it is really inflammatory ; inflammation,
and a mere error loci from determination of blood, are very different
states of parts. I do not believe that opium has the power of pro-
ducing inflammation of the stomach, and I mention this that it may
guide your judgment if you should be called upon to give evidence in
a court of justice, in a case of this kind. You should make up your
minds never to give an opinion as to the death of an individual being
produced by a vegetable poison, unless you find that vegetable poison
in the stomach, or some other strong proof be given that it was admi-
nistered. No appearances after death ought to induce you to take an
oath that an individual has perished by a vegetable poison. I may
here mention that Mr. Hunter himself used to lament that he had not
taken the same precaution on the occasion of a trial which agitated
the public mind very much forty years ago. He regretted that he had
not made more experiments on the subject of poisons before giving an
opinion in a court of justice. He found himself a good deal embarrassed
on that occasion ; the lawyers took advantage of his embarrassment ;
and he used to express his regret publicly in his lectures that he had
not given more attention to the subject before he ventured to give an
opinion in a court of justice. When opium is taken in considerable
doses for a length of time, the result is, that it renders the complexion
of the person extremely sallow, it produces obstinate costiveness, and
indeed arrests all the secretions. It also very much diminishes the
virile power and the disposition to sexual intercourse. I have known
several instances of its producing this last effect, when it has been
taken for a length of time. We read, indeed, that the Turks are in
the habit of taking opium for the purpose of increasing the propensity
to indulge in sexual intercourse ; but, as far as I have had an oppor-
tunity of judging of this fact, opium produces quite an opposite effect.
A gentleman, who had taken opium very freely in consequence of the
exhilarating effects it at first produced, told me that for a long time he had
suffered no inconvenience from it, and that he always found his pulse in-
creased in quickness by its use. In general, the pulse is not increased in
quickness : persons who take opium have a quick pulse, which becomes
slow and full under each additional dose, and at this time they feel in-
creased strength and exhilaration. In some cases, it is true, opium produces
a quickness of pulse. A student of this hospital, who made a number of



43G



ON POISONS.



experiments to ascertain the effects of opium, found that when he took it
in considerable doses, his pulse rose from 75 to 80, and then began to
decline till it fell to 05. Opium, when taken in considerable quantities,
after a time puts a stop to all the secretions ; the semen is secreted in
very small quantities, and in some cases it is scarcely secreted at all. A
married man, who took opium very freely, declared to me, that, though
he slept very regularly with his wife, it was rather a matter of ceremony
than of practical duty, for he never felt the slightest disposition to
sexual intercourse. 1 knew a man who had during two years taken
very large quantities of opium for pains in his bowels, who also declared
to me, that he never had the least inclination for amatory indulgence.
The nerves are rendered highly irritable by opium. A gentleman, who
was in the habit of taking opium, came into my room, where the win-
dow was not quite fastened, and the wind whistled a little behind it.
After chatting for a short time, he rose in a state of violent agitation,
and rushing to the window, exclaimed, “ I can bear it no longer ; this

d d iEolian harp will distract me.” This irritable state of the

nerves, produced by opium, is relieved by a fresh dose : it becomes ab-
solutely necessary to the patient, and the nervousness produced by the
opium of yesterday is relieved by the opium of to-day. The largest
quantity of opium I have ever known taken, was swallowed by a pupil
in this hospital. He sent for half a pint of the tincture of opium, for
which he wrote a prescription. The chemist had not quite half a pint,
but he sent somewhat more than seven ounces. Of this quantity the
pupil took so much, that not more than a tea-spoonful was left in the
phial : he must have taken, therefore, about six ounces and six drachms.
As this young man was a dresser of mine, I felt particularly anxious
about him ; and, being informed, during lecture, that he had taken
laudanum to destroy himself, I immediately went to the house of Mr.
Phillips, the surgeon, in Union-street, where he was lodging. They were
very properly walking him to and fro, and a quantity of the flour of
mustard in water had been given to him, with a view of producing vo-
miting, but without success. I ordered him a large dose of the sulphate
of zinc ; but this did not produce vomiting, though it occasioned irri-
tation in the throat. I directed the sulphate of zinc to be repeated ; and
on quitting the house I met Dr. Marcet, my colleague at Guy’s, to whom
I communicated the circumstances. Dr. Marcet immediately said, “ Pray
give him fifteen grains of the sulphate of copper.” We gave him this
quantity of the sulphate of copper, which, very shortly after it had en-
tered the stomach, produced vomiting ; and he threw up a quantity of
liquid, smelling very strongly of opium. He was kept constantly in
motion, the vomiting was assisted by copious draughts of warm water.



ON POISONS.



437



and in this way he recovered. Two days after, I met him in the square
of the hospital, and asked him, how he did? “ Why (said he), my
throat is a little sore from the effects of the sulphate of copper.” “ And
how came you to take the opium ?” said I. “ Why, sir, (said he), I
will tell you : I think my teeth are not so white as they used to be ; the
women observe this, and no longer regard me with the same affection ;
this it is which makes me miserable.” ( A lauyh.) Perceiving that he
was mad, I took measures to have him placed under the care of his
friends. I have known persons take a drachm of opium day after day,
in divided doses. A Turk, who was selling rhubarb at the other hos-
pital, being asked how much opium he could eat, showed us how much
on his fingers. A drachm of solid opium was given to him, and he
shewed it before us. People often ruin themselves by a disposition to
take opium. I knew a woman, in tolerable circumstances, in a village
in Norfolk, who was in the habit of taking large quantities of opium ;
she would buy a pint of laudanum at a time, at a chemist’s shop, and,
if any remained after filling her bottle, she would drink it off in a wine
glass. This woman was at last unable to buy her opium, and she be-
came a pauper in the parish in which she resided. It is a habit which
grows upon persons excessively, and ought never to be indulged. Opium
applied externally, will produce poisonous effects; not so soon, indeed,
as when it is administered internally, but with equal certainty. If you
apply opium over an extensive surface of sore, it will produce obstinate
costiveness, and violent pain in the head, a furred brown tongue and a
high degree of fever. I remember a man in the other hospital, who
laboured under these symptoms, in consequence of having opium ap-
plied over an extensive ulcer. It was not at first thought that the
opium produced these effects ; but upon its being suspended, the symp-
toms disappeared. I have known opium in water applied on the surface
of a scald in a child, which, I really believe, occasioned its death. It
produced violent constipation of the bowels, and convulsive motion in the
eyes of the child. You should never apply opium over any extensive
wound. If opium be injected into the veins of an animal, the pulse will
be so quickened, that it can with difficulty be reckoned. It will then
become so convulsed, that you can scarcely hold it on the table. In
about five minutes it is tranquillized, and the pulse gradually sinks,
until it is hardly perceptible; after an hour, the pulse is reduced to from
20 deg. to 30 deg. below the ordinary pulsation, which in a dog is from
110 to 130. The animal becomes sleepy at the same time that its pulse
is reduced. With respect to the treatment of persons who have taken
considerable quantities of opium, active emetics should be immediately
administered, if you have an opportunity of doing so ; such as the sul-

v v 2



438



ON POISONS.



pbate of zinc or the sulphate of copper. But it will often happen that
you have not these substances at hand : you must endeavour in that
case to excite us much irritation as possible in the throat, with a view
of producing vomiting. I certainly think, however, after the experiment
which you had an opportunity of witnessing in this theatre, and that
which was made on the dog in the other hospital, that the instrument
for evacuating the stomach affords the best means of saving persons,
who would otherwise perish under the influence of opium. I mentioned
to you on a former occasion the case of a young lady who had taken
opium, in which every means which I could employ for the purpose of
producing vomiting proved completely unavailing. When the oesophagus
has lost its functions, which it soon does from the influence of opium,
no stimulating substances will produce the least effect upon it. 1 sat
hour after hour by the side of this young lady, watching her progress
to dissolution, without being in the least able to prevent it. If, how -
ever, I had been acquainted with the instrument which has been since in-
vented, I should have used it with the probability of success. This
instrument enables us not merely to remove the poison from the sto-
mach, but also to throw in water in considerable quantities, and to in-
troduce stimulating remedies after the opium is removed, for the pur-
pose of restoring the functions of the nervous system ; and this in cases
where emetics cannot be even swallowed. I certainly do expect the
happiest results in such cases from the invention of this instrument.
The man who first suggested such an idea deserves well of his country,
and they who oppose it until the instrument has been fairly tried and
found useless, must be destitute of understanding. Persons who object
to a proposition merely because it is new, or who endeavour to detract
from the merit of the man who first gives efficacy to a new idea by de-
monstrating its usefulness and applicability, are foolish, unmanly, en-
vious and illiberal objectors ; they are unworthy of the designation either
of professional men or of gentlemen.

I will take this opportunity of mentioning to you, that the new medi-
cine — iodine, which is now much employed in enlargements of the glands,
in the form of hydriodate of potash, is a very active poison, and you
should be very much on your guard in employing it. I witnessed very
lately an instance of an over-dose of this substance producing the most
violent convulsive symptoms. The quantity of iodine taken was less
than that which is often given, but it was an over-dose to this patient.
There were forty drops of the tincture in a mixture of six ounces, and he
was desired to take three table-spoonfuls three times a day ; he had only
taken three-fourths of the mixture, when he was seized with the most
violent convulsions ; his hands, legs, and feet, were kept in constant in-



ON POISONS.



439



voluntary motion ; and he declared, that during the whole night he
resembled a person in the act of fighting and wrestling. Dr. Marcet
mentioned to me the case of a lady, on the continent, who destroyed
herself by taking this medicine : she thought she could manage it her-
self; took it for several days, and increased the doses. She was seized
with violent vomiting, purging, excessive pain in the stomach, and con-
vulsive symptoms, and in this state she died. It is a dangerous remedy
when used internally, and I do not think its merits as an internal me-
dicine are at all equal to those which it possesses as an external appli-
cation.

I shall proceed to say a few words on the mineral poisons. Arsenic
is a poison very commonly taken for the purpose of committing suicide :
very soon after this poison is swallowed, the most excruciating pain is
felt in the stomach; besides this effect on the stomach it produces exces-
sive vomiting, violent spasmodic contractions of the muscles of the abdo-
men, twitchings and convulsive motions of the hands. The pain is so
horrible, that much as we may lament the want of firmness which leads
to the commission of suicide, we deplore still more the suffering occa-
sioned by a poison which produces such excruciating torture as arsenic.
A person who has taken a sufficient quantity of arsenic to destroy life,
dies about nine hours after having taken it. During that time he suffers
the most excruciating agony until within two hours of his death, when his
pain is somewhat mitigated ; he is then convulsed, his body is perfectly
pallid, and covered with a cold perspiration ; and his feces pass off in-
voluntarily. On examination of the body after death, a very large quan-
tity of mucus appears to be thrown out, in consequence of the irritation
produced by the arsenic. This is a sort of defence set up by nature, a
quantity of mucilaginous matter being produced, which is for a time
capable of supporting the oxide of arsenic, so as to keep it from the coats
of the stomach. When the quantity is large, the poison penetrates
through this mucilaginous secretion, affects the internal coats of the sto-
mach, and produces gangrene. The inflammation, however, is not
general, but affects only particular spots. When the poison passes the
bounds of the stomach, and enters the duodenum, it still produces ulce-
rated spots of a gangrenous colour, the inflammation not being generally
diffused. If, therefore, you should be called upon in a court of justice
to say whether you believe a person to have been poisoned by arsenic,
your judgment must be guided by the following appearances : — If the
person has died by the effects of arsenic, you will find a large quantity of
mucus secreted in the stomach, a part of the arsenic supported in the
mucus, and gangrenous spots in the internal part of the stomach. Hav-
ing found these appearances, and carefully washed out the stomach, it



440



ON POISONS.



is better to send the contents to some person who is in the habit of making
chemical experiments. A medical man, unless he is a first-rate chemist,
ought not to depend upon his own experiments in cases where the lives
of individuals may, perhaps, be involved in the decision. He should
content himself with carefully collecting the contents of the stomach,
and sending them to be analysed by a professed chemist. The dose of
arsenic, when it is given as a medicine, is five drops of the arseniate of
potash three times a-day at the commencement. This dose may be in-
creased at the utmost to fifteen drops. Few stomachs can bear it to that
extent ; and, in general, when I give this medicine with a view to the
removal of any periodical disease of the intermittent form, I begin with
five drops three times a-day, and very rarely increase it beyond twelve
drops. The bad effects which this medicine produces after a time, often
leads us to regret that we should have employed it at all. It occasions
pain in the stomach, a disordered state of the bowels, cedematous swell-
ings in the face, and in the hands and feet, from which it is often a long
time before the patient recovers. With respect to the external applica-
tion of arsenic, you should be very much on your guard in its employ-
ment. I remember a patient in the other hospital, who had a fungus in
the eye, to which the solution of arsenic was very liberally applied ; he
complained very much of pain in the stomach, and the result was, that
he died of inflammation in that organ. On examination of the body
after death, the stomach exhibited the peculiar inflammatory appear-
ances produced by the poison of arsenic. It is a curious circumstance,
that if arsenic be injected into the blood-vessels, it kills by producing
inflammation in the stomach. There are few subjects which have been
less attended to than the disposition that exists in some parts of the
body to be acted upon by certain medicines, to the exclusion of other
parts. Thus, if ipecacuanha be injected into the veins, it still acts by
producing vomiting; if arsenic be injected, it produces vomiting and
inflammation of the stomach ; introduced in this way, it destroys life in
three or four hours, and if in large doses, it will sometimes prove fatal
in twenty minutes. If oxymuriateof mercury be injected into the veins,
it produces the destruction of life by inflammation, not only of the sto-
mach, but of the intestines; when received into the stomach, it acts
both on the stomach and intestine ; and when injected into the veins, it
acts equally on both. Arsenic produces inflammation of the stomach
only, and not of the intestinal canal. Tartrite of antimony and ipeca-
cuanha both produce vomiting, when injected into the veins. It ap-
pears, therefore, that you can only influence certain parts of the body,
by particular medicines, in whatever way those medicines may be in-
troduced into the circulation. Certain substances have uniformly spe-



ON POISONS.



441



cific effects on particular parts of the body ; thus cantharides act on the
neck of the bladder, aloes on the rectum, and other medicines, which
we are in the habit of using, have an influence on one part of the body,
to the exclusion of all the rest. This subject is well deserving of atten-
tion ; it has been but little investigated, and affords an ample field for
research and useful discovery. The oxymuriate of mercury is often
used for the purpose of destroying life; it produces vomiting and
purging, great depression of strength, coldness of the extremities, and
death frequently ensues in the course of a few hours. With respect to
the means which should be employed with a view of removing the oxy-
muriate of mercury from the stomach, I will tell you what I believe to
be the best remedy to resort to at the moment, for it will often happen
that you cannot obtain the best chemical preparations for that purpose.
It is well known that the carbonate of potash or soda decomposes this
substance. What I should advise you to do, therefore, would be to
mix a quantity of soap with warm water, and, making it as thick a lather
as you can, give it in large quantities to the patient. I have myself tried
this remedy, and my patient recovered, whether post hoc or propter hoc,
I will not decide ; but my belief is, that I could not have administered
a better remedy than that which suggested itself to me on the sudden,
if I had been in Apothecaries’ Hall. The alkali of the soap imme-
diately decomposes the oxymuriate of mercury, while the greasy matter
sheaths the stomach, and checks the further influence of any portion of
the substance which might remain. This, therefore, appears to be the
best extemporaneous remedy you can employ in such cases. Diluents
should be given to a very considerable extent, as well as the alkali.

It may appear that I am disposed to think too well of the instrument
to which I before adverted, when I state that I believe that the syringe
may also be successfully employed for the purpose of removing the
oxymuriate of mercury from the stomach. I should certainly prefer it
to any other means ; but instead of using simple water, I should throw
in a quantity of soap and water ; then withdraw it. I should repeat
this operation until the stomach was entirely cleansed. It has been sug-
gested, that although this instrument may be used with success for the
removal of vegetable poisons from the stomach, yet it would not succeed
in cases of poison by arsenic or corrosive sublimate. This I do not be-
lieve. With respect to arsenic, I am aware that, if it were taken in the
solid form, and a considerable portion had fallen on the stomach, it
would be impossible to remove it ; but, as it is usually taken in powder,

I think the instrument is very capable of removing it, because it will be
for a considerable time, at least, kept in solution by the mucus which is
thrown out from the surface of the stomach, and in this state it may be



442



ON POISONS.



removed. At all events this deserves a trial. They who suppose that
the arsenic adheres to the internal coats of the stomach so that it cannot
be removed, have never made any experiments with the oxide of arsenic;
it does not adhere to the coats, but it is lifted from them by mucus.
With respect to the influence of lead, I have but little to observe. In
colica pictonum, where we have an opportunity of observing its effects, no
inflammation appears to be produced in the stomach. This disease seems
to be entirely spasmodic ; it will be right to administer large quantities
of castor oil and emetics. I have known persons suddenly lose the use
of one side from the effects of lead. 1 once observed that a boy who was
at work at my house, had paraplegia ; and I asked him how he came to
lose the use of his side. “ Why, sir (said he), very foolishly I had some
lead in my pocket, as I was going home to my master’s, and on the road
I bought some gooseberries, and put them into my pocket. I found that
the mixtute of lead only made the fruit sweeter ; so I finished my goose-
berries, and on the following morning I lost the use of my side.”

I shall conclude this lecture by shewing you the effect of a powerful
poison called ticunas, with which the Indians, in the back settlements
of Demerara, arm their arrows. There is a very minute portion of the
poison on a stick in this little box, which is sufficient, however, to
poison every one of you. I shall, insert a small particle, I know not
what fraction of a grain, into the cellular tissue of a rabbit, and you
will see that, in the space of three or four minutes, the animal will die,
without appearing to suffer the least pain. It will probably continue
to eat the parsley on the table till it dies.

[The first rabbit on which the learned professor performed the ex-
periment, walked about the table, and partook of his parsley, but
declined dying at the end of four minutes. ^Whether the poison were
not effectually introduced within the cellular tissue, or whether this
rabbit was blessed with an idiosyncrasy which rendered him insensible
to its effects, we will not decide ; certain it is, that he continued to eat
ffis parsley with a provoking vivaciousness up to the moment we left
the theatre. The learned professor introduced a minute portion of the
poison within the cellular tissue of a second rabbit, on which it soon
produced the usual deadly effects. It appeared to suffer no pain, but
at the expiration of three minutes, its hinder extremities were paralysed;
in three minutes and a half it appeared to be insensible, and at the end
of four minutes it rolled on its back, and died.]



OX VIRULENT GONORRHOEA.



443



LECTURE LV.

The subject of this evening’s lecture will be the

VENEREAL DISEASE.

There are two poisons communicated by venereal intercourse : one
the poison of gonorrhoea, which, falling upon a mucous surface, pro-
duces from that surface a discharge of matter which is infectious ; the
other, the poison of syphilis, being applied to the surface of the skin,
or, as far as is known at present, to any surface, produces inflammation
and ulceration, forming a sore which is called chancre ; the discharge
from this, being received into the absorbent glands, occasions bubo,
and, being conveyed into the circulation, produces inflammation and
ulceration in the throat, on the skin, the periosteum, and the bones.

OF VIRULENT GONORRHOEA.

"When gonorrhoeal matter is applied to the urethra, the following
symptoms generally arise in three or four days after its application : —
The patient first experiences a sense of titillation in the urethra, as if a
drop of urine were contained in it This directs his attention to the
part ; and he finds that the lips of the urethra are red, and that
there is a slight mucous discharge. The next circumstances which take
place are these : the urethra begins to be affected with considerable heat,
and he experiences pain in discharging his urine ; this state is called
ardor urinte. The pain increases till it becomes, in many cases, ex-
cessively severe : there is an appearance of threads mixed with the urine,
which arises from the adhesive inflammation in the lacunae of the
urethra. The next effect is a considerable diminution in the stream,
the swollen state of the urethra contracting the size of the canal. The
urine is often discharged in two, three, or more streams, in consequence
of the contracted and irregular state of the. urethra. At first the dis-
charge from the urethra is mucous, but after a little time it assumes a
purulent appearance. The matter becomes yellow, and, if the inflam-
mation is very considerable, green ; and it is often intermixed with
blood, so as to give a sanious appearance to the discharge. You are
enabled, therefore, from the colour and appearance of the matter, to
judge of the degree of inflammation in the urethra. These are the cir-
cumstances which occur with respect to the appearance of the matter.
I should observe to you, that, although the appearance of this fluid is
purulent, it has not really the character of common pus. If you exa-
mine the discharge by the aid of a magnifying power, you will find



444



ON VIRULENT GONORRHCEA.



that, though there may be some few globules of pus, the greater part of
the discharge is mucus. The time this matter will continue to discharge
is quite indefinite. It is said that gonorrhcea will wear itself out, but
it will sooner wear out the patience of the patient. I hare known it
continue for months, and I shall have occasion to mention a case in which
it continued to be infectious during all that time. It sometimes continues
for so long a time notwithstanding all the means which may be em-
ployed for its cure, as to be an opprobrium to our art. In no case,
however, ought you to rely on the efforts of nature for its cure ; for, in
general, you may very much expedite the cure by adoptiug a judicious
method of treatment. Besides these external effects on the urethra,
gonorrhma takes also an internal course. It does not confine itself, in
its external effects, to the beginning of the urethra, but often produces
an erysipelatous inflammation of the glands and fraenum, occasioning
effusion into the prepuce and phymosis. The absorbent vessels on the
dorsum penis often become enlarged and hard, and produce little ab-
scesses, which go on to suppuration. The glands of the groin are sym-
pathetically affected, and in a first gonorrhoea, seldom fail to become
enlarged and painful. Where this effect takes place from gonorrhcea,
several glands of the groin are affected at the same time; whereas, in
the absorption of the poison of syphilis, a single gland only is enlarged
on each side. Abscesses are very rarely occasioned by a sympathetic
enlargement of the glands of the groin from gonorrhoea; they may
almost always be prevented by proper attention on the part of the
surgeon. When I say the glands of the groin are sympathetically
affected, I am aware that this is not a strictly proper term for this
species of irritation, because the swelling undoubtedly arises in con-
sequence of the gonorrhoeal inflammation running along the course of
the absorbent glands; it is a continuation of the inflammation along
the course of the absorbent vessels. With respect to the internal course
of gonorrhoea, the effusion in the urethra often proceeds further than
the original seat of the inflammation. Swelling and suppuration often
take place in the mouths of the lacunas ; matter is very commonly
accumulated in the lacunee, and especially in the lacuna magna, which
may be known by a swelling and fluctuation on the sides of the fraenum.
Irritation and inflammation also take place in the corpora spongiosa,
producing that painful state of the parts termed chordee, in which the
penis feels as if it were bound down, so as to prevent a complete ex-
tension. The penis is sometimes curved, and sometimes turned con-
siderably to one side. The next effect of gonorrhoea is the production
of stricture, which is generally seated near the bulb of the urethra, and
arises from the diminished diameter of the canal, in consequence of the



ON VIRULENT GONORRHtEA.



445



thickening of the part from inflammation ; another effect is an inflam-
matory state of the muscles of the perineum, accompanied with great
irritation, and violent spasmodic contractions.

The inflammation sometimes extends itself to the spot where the
vasa deferentia open at the verumontanum, producing a swelling, which
was absurdly called hernia humoralis. When it extends to the prostatic
part of the urethra, there is great irritation at the neck of the bladder;
the patientMs often under the necessity of pressing on the perineum
when he makes water, and soon after inflammation of the testicle
begins.

Whenever an old fool gets a gonorrhoea, it is generally accompanied
with an enlarged state of the prostate gland, and he rarely escapes
without experiencing the most excruciating suffering from this cause.
It rarely happens that an old man gets this disease without having
bitter reason to repent of his folly. The bladder becomes affected, in
consequence of the gonorrhoeal inflammation ; it becomes highly irri-
table, and the patient experiences a constant inclination to make water.
Thus gonorrhoea produces various effects, not only in its external but
in its internal course ; such as abscesses in the lacuna, stricture, inflam-
mation of the prostate gland, and irritability of the bladder. It is not
so simple a disease, therefore, as you might at first be disposed to
imagine. There is no comparison as to the difficulty of getting rid of
syphilis and gonorrhoea : syphilis is a disease which a child may gene-
rally cure; gonorrhoea is a disease which very often baffles the longest
experience, and the greatest professional skill.

Having described to you the symptoms of gonorrhoea, I shall make
a few general observations on the disease, before I proceed to speak of
the treatment of it. In the first place, what is the time in which it
appears after connexion ? The usual limit is from four to seven days ;
it is seldom under four, and very rarely exceeds- seven days. I have
known it, however, occur within twenty-four hours after connexion ;
and sometimes a fortnight, or a longer time, will elapse before it
appears. I have known an instance in which it was delayed for fourteen
weeks, in consequence, I believe, of the general indisposition of the
patient. The cause of gonorrhoea is undoubtedly inflammation of the
lacunae of the urethra, and particularly the lacuna magna. You will
have an opportunity of seeing the state of the lacuna under this inflam-
mation, in the injected urethra, in two different preparations. The in-
flammation is of the erysipelatous kind, but there is no appearance of
ulceration. If ulceration were produced, the membrane of the urethra
would soon give way. It is merely a secretion from the mouths of the
vessels ; ulceration does occasionally take place in the lacunae, but not

Q



446



ON VIRULENT GONORRHOEA.



in the urethra itself. When the inflammation runs high, it extends
down to the bulb of the urethra.

Many years ago, I bad an opportunity of examining the urethra of a
man who was executed, and who had gonorrhoea at the time of his
execution. The inflammation had extended down to the bulb of the
urethra ; for an inch, or an inch and a half down, the urethra was
exceedingly red, and there was some effusion of matter on the internal
surface ; the urethra was red at the bulb, but not of so deep a colour.
The inflammation, therefore, is not confined to an inch, or an inch and
a half down the urethra, but often extends over the bulb of the urethra,
and in this way produces strictures. In the case to which I allude, the
gonorrhoeal inflammation had extended at least seven inches down the
urethra. In general, on examination of a subject who has died under
gonorrhoea, you will find a small quantity of purulent matter at the
extremity of the penis, and inflammation extending about an inch
and a half down the urethra, which if exposed to the air for twenty -four
hours, assumes a florid redness. With respect to the manner in which
this disease is performed, I have heard some very curious and laughable
disquisitions on this subject, by persons who prefer entering into such
speculations to making observations for themselves. There can be no
doubt that the disease is produced by the direct application of the poison
to the lips of the urethra, for you will find that the first symptom
which takes place is a pouting state of the lips of the urethra, arising
from inflammation. The lips are first attacked, and the inflammation
gradually extends itself to the internal surface of the urethra ; the
disease begins from without, and extends itself to the internal surface.
So much for the manner in which the poison is received. We find that
the discharge from gonorrhoea is very much affected by constitutional
causes. A man shall have an abundant discharge from the urethra,
considerable pain, and even chordee ; and if he should get a fever, the
discharge disappears, the pain ceases, and he will be entirely free from
all symptoms of the disease for a period of from seventeen to twenty
days. As soon, however, as he begins to recover from his fever, the
discharge of matter will be removed, the pain and chordee will return,
and a long time may elapse before the disease can be removed. These
constitutional causes suspend the action of gonorrhoea, but the symp-
toms will return as soon as the constitutional irritation ceases. You
will generally find the cure of gonorrhoea difficult in proportion as the
constitution of the patient is disposed to strumous affections. If a
patient has pimples in his face, enlargement of the glands of the neck,
a thin delicate skin and irritable fibre, you may expect to have great
difficulty in curing him of gonorrhoea. I shall now proceed to speak



ON VIRULENT GONORRHOEA.



447



Of the Treatment of Gonorrhcea . — The treatment of gonorrhoea is
founded on two principles ; the disease may be either treated simply, by
diminishing inflammation, or it may be treated by producing a change
in the action of the part, by which the disease is removed in a short
period. These are the two principles on which surgeons act in the treat-
ment of gonorrhoea. In the first place, gentlemen, let me observe to you,
that no greater folly, and indeed cruelty, can be committed, than that of
giving mercury to patients, for the cure of this disease. A man who
gives mercury in gonorrhoea, really deserves to be flogged out of his pro-
fession, because he must be quite ignorant of the principles on which this
disease is to be cured. To give mercury to a young and irritable per-
son, who is probably constantly exposed to vicissitudes of temperature,
for a disease which does not require it, (thus exposing the health, and
even the life of the patient to danger) is, in the present state of our
knowledge, perfectly unpardonable. It is lamentable to reflect on the
number of lives which must have been destroyed by phthisis and other-
wise, in consequence of the imprudent exhibition of mercury for a dis-
ease which did not require it, which prevailed among the older surgeons.
At the present time, however, a surgeon must be either grossly ignorant,
or shamefully negligent of the duty which he owes to the character of
his profession, and to the common dictates of humanity, if he persists
in giving mercury for this disease. Let those persons who suppose that
gonorrhcea can be cured by mercury, go round our wards, and see whe-
ther mercury has any effect on that disease. Look, gentlemen, at 100
patients in our foul wards, many of whom come into the hospital with
syphilis and gonorrhcea ; and many, I am sorry to say, who have only
gonorrhoea, but who are invariably carried to these wards. What is the
miserable treatment of these patients ? You are aware, gentlemen, that
I scarcely ever enter the foul wards of the other hospital ; — when a par-
ticular case demands my attention, I have the patient removed to a clean
ward. I will tell you why I do not enter those wards, gentlemen. I
abstain from entering them, because patients under gonorrhoea are com-
pelled to undergo so infamous a system of treatment that I cannot bear
to witness it. To compel an unfortunate patient to undergo a course of
mercury tor a disease which does not require it, is a proceeding which
reflects disgrace and dishonour on the character of a medical institution.
No consideration shall induce me to repress my feelings on this subject;
no authority shall restrain me from giving full expression to those feel-
ings. As long as I continue a surgeon of Guy’s Hospital, I will endea-
vour to do my duty ; but I care not whether I continue a surgeon of that
hospital another day. I do say that the present treatment of patients
under gonorrhcea in these hospitals, by putting them unnecessarily



448



ON VIRULENT GONORRIICEA.



under a course of mercury for five or six weeks, is infamous and dis-
graceful. The health of a patient is, perhaps, irremediably destroyed
by this treatment ; and, after all, not the slightest effect is produced by
it on the disease. If he is cured of his gonorrhoea at all, he must be
cured by other means. If you go to a patient for gonorrhoea in the foul
wards, at the end of his course, and ask him how many times he has
rubbed in, he will generally answer, “ twenty-eight times.” If you
ask whether he is salivated, he will tell you that he spits three pints a
day ; but ask him whether his gonorrhoea is cured, and he will reply,
“ No, I have a clap still upon me.” His disease is not in the slightest
degree affected by the mercurial course to which he has been so unpar-
donably subjected, and it will soon after be necessary to cure him by in-
jections or other means. When so infamous e practice prevails, I can-
not satisfy my own feelings by resorting to milk-and-water language ,
every man of common feeling and honesty is bound to speak out on such
an occasion. It is wholly unnecessary to give mercury in any form for
this disease. When a patient applies to you for a first clap, it seldom
happens that he can be cured by the same means which may be success-
fully employed in subsequent claps. The first clap is generally much
more difficult to cure than those which subsequently occur. I shall
proceed to state to you the result of the experience which I have had in
the cure of this disease, for thirty-three or thirty-four years.

If I have not yet learnt the best mode of treating it, I have no hope
that I can know any thing more on the subject. I will state to you the
plan which I have found to answer better than any other : without
meaning, however, to say, that this plan is better than those which may
be adopted by others. When the patient applies to you for his first clap,
there will be generally a great deal of inflammation, and I advise you
to give the sulphate of magnesia with the infusion of senna. An ounce
of the sulphate of magnesia may be mixed with six ounces of the infu-
sion of senna, and three table spoonfuls given two or three times a-day,
so as to purge the patient very actively. You may afterwards give tire
submurias hydrargyri with extract of colocynth, but merely as a purge ,
for if it were to act as a mercurial, I would not give it at all. lliere is
no necessity for giving calomel, unless you wish it to acton the liver, as
well as on the intestinal canal. Having purged the patient very freely,
you will direct him to take diluting drinks, of which he can hardly take
too much. Two drachms of the carbonate of potash, or the subcarbonate
of soda, should be taken in a quart of some diluting drink in the course
of a day: capillaire, or tea, will answer this purpose very well; some
advise the gum of acacia, but whether it does any good or not, I do not
know. I have found the liquor, calcis a very excellent diluent in this



ON VIRULENT GONORRHOEA.



449



disease. Soda water is often useful, but it must be ascertained whether
it produces irritability of the bladder; for, in some persons, it increases,
instead of diminishing, irritability. If it increases very much the in-
clination to make water, it should not be persisted in ; if it does not
produce this effect, it is a very excellent diluent. The penis should be
suffered to hang for a considerable time in warm water, which will relieve
the inflammation, and produce nearly all the good of a warm bath.
W hen the ardor urinse and pain from chordee is very severe, twenty
drops of the liquor, potassse, with from three to five grains of the ex-
tract of conium, in the mistura camphorata, may be given with consi-
derable advantage. This is the plan which you should pursue during
the first week. You may then apply lint dipped in the liquor, plumbi
subacetatis dilutus, to the part. Do not use an injection in the first in-
stance, but pursue the plan I have pointed out to you during the first
ten days. At the end of this time, when the inflammation has in a great
degree subsided, you may begin by giving the patient the balsamum
copaibas. An ounce of the balsam may be mixed with an ounce of the
mucilage of acacia, and four ounces of the mistura comphorata, and a
table spoonful given morning and evening. Having given this mixture
for two days, the discharge will be very considerably diminished, and
you may then order an injection of the liquor, plumbi subacetatis dilu-
tus. This is the mode, gentlemen, in which gonorrhoea, as far as I
know, is to be cured in the safest and most expeditious manner. In the
third week I continue to give the balsamum copaibre ; and the best in-
jection which can then be employed, is the liquor, plumbi subacetatis
dilutus, with the sulphate of zinc.

R,. Sulphatis zinci, gr. vj.

Liq. plumbi subacet. diluti, f iv.

By this plan you will generally succeed in curing a gonorrhoea safely
and expeditiously. If, instead of using an injection, you suffer the dis-
charge to run on, week after week, you will be almost sure to lay the
foundation of stricture.

If a patient apply to you for a second or third clap, you will not pro-
ceed in this way, but give him the balsam of capivi immediately, which
will, in general, put a speedy stop to the discharge. The inflammation
of a second clap is comparatively slight, and, in general, it will only be
necessary to give the balsam copaiba for a week, and then begin with
the injection of the liquor, plumbi subacetatis dilutus, and the sulphate
of zinc. In a first clap it is better to begin with the liquor, plumbi
subacetatis dilutus in the first instance, because this is less irritating,
and afterwards use it in combination with the sulphate of zinc. The
treatment which is necessary to subdue inflammation in a first clap is,

ft ft 2



450



ON VIRULENT GONORRIKEA.



in general, entirely unnecessary in subsequent claps. Various other
injections are employed in the treatment of the gonorrhoea ; half a grain
of the sulphate of copper in an ounce of rose water is a powerful injec-
tion ; a solution of the oxymuriate of mercury makes a very irritating
injection, if of any strength, and should not be resorted to in the first
instance. It is used in the proportion of one grain to twelve ounces of
distilled water. You should feel your way in the use of irritating in-
jections ; if they produce much inflammation, you should suspend the
use of them ; and if, on the other hand, they excite no pain at all, you
may gradually increase their strength. Do not continue the use of the
same injection, if it does not answer the purpose very quickly ; for you
will otherwise be only laying the foundation of stricture. It is much
better to vary your injection, than to persist in the use of the same in-
jection, if it does not very speedily put a stop to the discharge. It will
often happen that a patient will continue for a length of time under the
hands of his surgeon without getting rid of the discharge. If a patient
should come to you under these circumstances, what I recommend you
to do, is to begin immediately the use of bougies with injections. The
use of bougies will increase the discharge for a time ; but, being com-
bined afterwards with the use of an injection of the sulphate of zinc,
will generally succeed in effecting a cure. With respect to the number
of times the patient should inject, three or four times a day will be quite
sufficient. As to the strength of the injection, it should be increased so
as to produce a slight degree of irritation ; but it is better to vary the
injection, than to increase its strength in any great degree. There are
other means of curing gonorrhoea, by producing a change in the action
of the urethra, as, for instance, by the use of cubebs. I remember the
time when this remedy was much ridiculed, but there is now no surgeon
of the least experience who does not acknowledge that it is a very pow-
erful remedy in this disease. The value of this remedy may be known
by applying to any merchant with respect to it. A short time ago it
was introduced into this country in very small quantities ; but now,
such is its acknowledged efficacy, that whole shiploads of it are annually
brought into the port of London. I do not say that it would be ad-
visable to employ this remedy at once for a first gonorrhoea, where the
symptoms of inflammation run very high in a young and irritable per-
son ; it is better not to begin with the use of it until a week or ten
days have elapsed, and the inflammation is considerably reduced. I will
tell you how I first learnt the value of this remedy : a gentleman from
Java, who had lived for some time in Batavia, entered my room, and, un-
buttoning his clothes, immediately showed me the part about which his
mind was utieasy, and asked me whether I thought a sore upon it was



ON VIRULENT GONORRHCEA.



451



venereal ? I said, certainly not. He said he was glad to hear it, for, if
it had been a chancre, he should have supposed that it had been pro-
duced by his curing a gonorrhoea very suddenly. He was running away
very hastily, when I requested him to tell me how lie had cured this
gonorrhoea so suddenly. “ Why, (he said), by cubebs.” “ Cubebs !
(said I), what is that?” for I had really at that time never heard of
such a thing. “ Why, (said he), it is a species of Java pepper, and, if
you like, I will send you a bottle of it.” I said I should be obliged to
him. He accordingly sent me a small bottle of it, which I put into my
desk, where it remained, without my thinking any more of the circum-
stance. Two or three months after, he came to me again, and said that
as he had had a severe genorrhoea, he should be obliged to me, if I had
any of the cubebs left, to let him have a little of it. This was on a
Thursday : I gave him the bottle, and after examining^this gonorrhoea,
which was very severe, I requested him to let me se/liim on the follow-
ing Monday. He came to me on that day, and the discharge was quite
gone. This excited my attention, and I began to think that it must be
a medicine of great power. Very soon after, a gentleman came to me,
and said that as he was going to give a very large dinner party, and
should be obliged to drink a good deal of wine, he wished to be cured of
a clap immediately. I told him I could not promise to do any such
thing, but, if he liked, I would give him a remedy, which a gentleman
from Java had used with great success; and I then related to him the
circumstance which I have just mentioned. The gentleman said he
would try it, and he should prefer it to the balsam of capivi ; of which
the people in his house knew the smell. ( A laugh.) He began taking
two drachms three times a-day on a Tuesday, and on Wednesday week
after, the discharge not having entirely disappeared, he called on me to
know whether he might take wine the next day, when he was to give
his dinner-party. I told him I saw no objection to it, and the effect of
the wine he drank on that day, added to the cubebs, completed his cure,
for the discharge did not return afterwards. Cubebs appears to produce
a specific inflammation of its own on the urethra, which has the effect
of superseding the gonorrhoeal inflammation. They who have tried
cubebs, and do not acknowledge its value, as a remedy for gonorrhoea,
cannot have made any accurate observations on the subject. It is a
remedy of a most admirable and useful kind, and may be given with
advantage even in the inflammatory stages of gonorrhoea, provided the
inflammation does not run excessively high. It is a most useful remedy
also tor the cure of gleet, as it is called, where gonorrhoea has continued
for a great length of time. In the very early stages of gonorrhoea, when
the inflammation is just beginning, it often succeeds in removing the



452



ON VIRULENT GONORRHCEA.



disease in a very short space of time. I have one more observation to
make with respect to this remedy, namely, that the greatest advantage
may be derived from combining its use with that of the balsam of co-
paiba. An ounce of the balsam of copaiba, an ounce of the mucilage
of acacia, and two drachms of cubebs, in four ounces of the mistura
camphorata, make an admirable mixture when the balsam of cobaiba
alone is beginning to lose its effect. Such, gentlemen, it appears to me,
is the mode of treating gonorrhoea, which will best contribute to the
maintenance of your own professional character, and to the welfare of
your patients.



LECTURE LVI.

In this evening’s lecture, gentlemen, I shall call your attention to some
of the consequences of gonorrhoea , and first of

STRICTURES OF THE URETHRA.

These are of three kinds — the permanent , spasmodic, and inflam,
matory.

The permanent stricture is the result of a thickening of the urethra
from chronic inflammation ; the spasmodic arises either from a contrac-
tion of the muscles surrounding the urethra, or from the urethra itself ;
the inflammatory , in consequence of inflammation of the acute kind,
which generally succeeds the acute gonorrhoea. This inflammation
occasions an extravasation of adhesive matter between the corpus spon-
giosum and surface of the urethra.

At the commencement of the formation of every permanent stricture,
you are made acquainted with the real nature of the complaint by the
following symptoms The first is, the retention of a few drops of urine
in the urethra, after the whole appears to have been discharged ; so that
when the penis has been returned into the small clothes, the linen be-
comes slightly wetted, and if you press on the under side of the urethra,
a few drops more will be voided, which had collected between the neck
of the bladder and that part of the urethra where the stricture is situ-
ated. The next circumstance you notice is an irritable state of the
bladder ; this is evinced by the person not being enabled to sleep so long
as usual without discharging his urine. A man in health, will sleep
for seven, eight, or nine hours, without being obliged to empty his blad-
der ; but when he has stricture, he cannot continue for a longer period
than four or five hours, and frequently much less even than this. The
next circumstance observable is the division of the stream, the reason of
which is that the urethra is in an uneven state from the irregular swell.



ON VIRULENT GONORRHOEA.



453



ing which surrounds it, and consequently the urine is thrown with an
inequality of force against its different sides : sometimes the stream
splits into two, becoming forked ; sometimes it is spiral ; at other times
it forms, as it were, a thin sheath. Occasionally the stream rises per-
pendicularly, its long axis being at right angles to the long axis of the
penis; thus, then, the retention of a few drops of urine after the whole
appears to have been discharged, a more frequent propensity to make
water than when in health, and the peculiar characters of the stream,
as just described to you, will be conclusive evidence of the existence of
stricture. In addition, there will sometimes be a discharge from the
urethra, which Tenders the linen of a bluish-white, similar to the ap-
pearances produced by nocturnal emissions : if the individual rides
much on horseback, the urine will be high-coloured, depending upon
the degree of excitement existing in the urethra. The next thing which
the patient notices is, that he discharges his urine by drops ; and, from
the irritable state of the bladder, the water is constantly dropping or
distilling away from the orifice of the urethra. An individual, then,
having permanent stricture, first observes a few drops of water remain
after the whole seems to have been discharged, then notices a fine spiral
or divided stream, and lastly, discharges his water by drops only : in
this last state, for the purpose of facilitating the escape of the urine,
and preventing its being retained by the lacunas of the urethra, he draws
out the penis with considerable force ; and thus, to express it in the
clearest way, milks himself.

Well, the next circumstance you observe is the discharge of a con-
siderable quantity of mucus along with the urine ; this is owing to the
inflammation having extended to the mucous membrane of the bladder ;
the urine, when discharged, is as transparent as usual ; but when it has
cooled, the mucus descends to the bottom, where it appears ropy, and
adheres to the vessel. As the inflammation of the membrane increases,
the urine becomes yellow ; but, if heated, the yellowness is not seen ;
and, when allowed to stand, as I before stated, the mucus will sink to
the bottom. These facts will explain to you whether the urine contains
mucus or pus. W hen the disease is of a very aggravated nature, the
urine will become quite white ; but, in all the stages of the complaint,
the colour of the water will be according to the degree of inflammatory
excitement ; and, when very severe, it will be charged with a consider-
able quantity of pus. When the urine is bloody, it is a proof that the
ulcerative process has commenced ; and if there be no blood, it is a proof
that there are no ulcers.

In that state of stricture, when the urine is loaded with pus, the patient
has frequent and severe rigors, or, even below that state of inflammation,



454



ON VIRULENT GONORRHCEA.



the person will have frequent shivering fits ; and upon going into his
room, you would suppose that he had an intermittent, and would order
him bark. In these cases, however, this medicine has no effect, and
you will find opium the remedy. I mention this that you may be upon
your guard in those cases, as they are manifest rigors succeeded by se-
vere heat, although they do not come on with that regularity that they
do in intermittents, nor at the same time of the day. In addition to these
symptoms, piles will be sometimes produced, and occasionally direct
inguinal hernia ; this last complaint is the consequence of the extreme
force that is employed to evacuate the urine.

Upon the dissection of those who die of stricture, (and 1 think per-
sons not unfrequently die of this complaint, though not so many now
as formerly), the following circumstances are observed : — The seat of
the stricture anterior to the bulb, just where it joins the corpus spongi-
osum — this part is naturally contracted and small, and it is here that you
will be obstructed, if you attempt to pass a straight bougie. The next
situation in which we find stricture, is in the membranous portion of
the urethra, or that part between the bulb and prostate gland : the next
situation is in the prostate gland itself. There is no part of the urethra
which is not liable to stricture, but most frequently it is found in the
three situations I have described to you. First, just at the beginning
of the bulb ; second, at the membranous (or as it ought more properly
speaking to be called, the muscular) part ; and, thirdly, in the prostate
gland itself.

Well, upon proceeding on our dissection, what we find to result from
stricture of the urethra is extraordinary dilatation of the urethra itself
behind the stricture. Here (holding up a preparation) you have an op-
portunity of seeing this fact. The stricture, you observe, one inch from
the extremity of the penis and the urethra, has become so much enlarged,
that it will receive the finger between the bulb and seat of stricture. The
next circumstance we observe, upon dissection, is an enormous thicken-
ing of the coats of the bladder ; this arises from the increased action
which the muscular fibres have to undergo ; for, the urine being fre-
quently discharged, the muscular fibres contract to produce the expul-
sion, and thus increase in size, in consequence of their increased action.
Thus, then, recollect that in strictures the bladder is thickened and
irritable.

Well, then, the next thing we observe is enlargement of the urethra ;
and this is owing to the urine collected in these tubes, from its not
finding a ready passage into the bladder; therefore, the ureters them-
selves become bladders.

Proceeding in our dissection, we often find the kidneys diseased,



455



ON VIRULENT GONORRHOEA.

and their glandular structure entirely absorbed ; and it not unfre-
quently happens, that strictures will produce disease in the kidneys,
which disease will prove destructive to life. In stricture, diseased
kidneys prove advantageous, in one point of view, which is the dimi-
nution of the secretion of the urine : if this, however, continues for
any length of time, the constitution will sink from the non-excretion of
that fluid : one kidney is generally more affected than the other. I have
just stated to you, that the glandular structure is sometimes entirely
absorbed, and the kidney is occasionally, in cases of stricture, so dis-
tended with urine, as almost to answer the purpose of a bladder. Well,
such are the appearances found upon dissection of those who die of
stricture.

Ever since I first began to lecture, I have always denominated that
stricture of the urethra which is produced, as it were, by a piece of
cord tied round it, the corded stricture. Another, that is produced as
if by the tying of a broad band, the ribbon stricture ; for it frequently
extends a considerable distance, even the entire way from the bulb to
the prostate. There is another species of stricture, occasioned by a
membranous band running across the urethra.

[Preparations, showing these varieties, were handed to the students,
and passed round the theatre.]

THE CAUSE OF PERMANENT STRICTURE OF THE URETHRA
is inflammation of the chronic kind : this occasions a greater determina-
tion of blood to the part, and produces a deposition of adhesive matter
on the outer side of the urethra ; the urethra itself becomes thickened,
which, together with being pressed upon by the adhesive matter col-
lected in the interstitial spaces surrounding the urethra, produces the
stricture in question.

As to the manner in which stricture is produced, I am opposed, on this
point, to Mr. Hunter, one of the greatest surgical authorities that ever
lived ; and, if asked what was the cause of stricture, I should say, in
ninety-nine cases out of every hundred it was the result of gonorrhoea It
is quite true that children, on whom not the slightest suspicion of their
having gonorrhoea could fall, occasionally have stricture. I have lately
met with a case of this description, and it was caused by the child hav-
ing received an injury when on horseback ; but still I would say, that
in ninety-nine cases out of every hundred, stricture is the result of ne-
glected gonorrhoea, riding or drinking hard, or any excess when the pa-
tient is labouring under that complaint.

Treatment of Permanent Stricture . — There are three principal ob-
jects to be attended to : the first of which is, to cure the complaint by



456



ON VIRULENT GONORRHOEA.



dilatation ; the second, absorption ; and the third, to destroy it alto-
gether. The first is effected by mechanical means ; the second, by the
influence of medicines; and the third, burning it away by means of
caustic. The first, or cure by dilatation, is accomplished by means of
bougies ; these are of various sizes, and made of either wax, elastic gum,
catgut, or silver ; catheters are also sometimes employed, and answer
the purpose tolerably well.

Now, with respect to wax bougies, before introducing them into the
urethra, you should always warm them by the fire, for the purpose of
rendering them soft, when, if they are introduced into the urethra, and
pass through the stricture, you will ascertain the distance at which it
is situated from the orifice, and the form and size of the stricture will
be modelled on the bougie. You then pass another bougie, a little
larger than the first ; and, directly that is withdrawn, another size, still
larger. On the following day you again introduce two bougies, that
is, if there should be no existing inflammation to prevent it; the first
bougie you then use, is to be of the same size as the one which you
concluded on the previous day ; after this has been withdrawn, you
again pass another, a size larger than the first ; thus using on every
occasion two bougies, always beginning with one of the same size as
that with which you had concluded on each preceding occasion. By
adopting this plan, strictures may be cured in a quarter of the time
that they usually are, and the strictured part of the urethra speedily
made to regain its natural size. Bougies have been numbered from
one to sixteen, so that surgeons may on each occasion know the size
they are using, and the size they last used : number sixteen is large
enough for a walking stick, and evidently too big to be safely passed
into any urethra ; and number fourteen is of quite sufficient magnitude
to establish the natural passage of any urethra. It is not necessary to
leave in the bougie any length of time; for, when the bougie has passed
the stricture, the effect of dilatation has been produced.

Never attempt to pass a bougie in its straight state ; for, if you do, it
will be obstructed in its passage, whether there be stricture or not; you
should invariably give it, before its introduction, the curve of the cathe-
ter : with regard to elastic gum bougies, they are not employed.

Every surgeon, I believe, has a mode of practice peculiar to himself ;
the bougie 1 use is made of silver ; it is of the form of the catheter, but
at the point, and running back for some distance towards the handle,
it is conical ; and the way I use it is this : I first pass down, in the
manner described to you, a wax bougie, for the purpose of ascertain-
ing the form, size, and distance of the stricture. Having obtained a
knowledge of these, I then introduce my conical silver bougie, the point



ON VIRULENT GONORRHCEA.



457



of which having entered die stricture, the further it passes the greater is
the dilatation produced, in consequence of the form of the instrument.
This bougie I have found extremely serviceable, and is the best with
which I am acquainted ; when it is not at hand, I use a common silver
catheter instead.

As to cat-gut bougies, they are now very rarely employed, except
when the stricture is particularly small, and then they are sometimes
required. There is another kind of bougie, made of horse-skin, after it
has been submitted to the action of lime, to prepare it for tanning.

Fashion, I am sorry to say, in surgery, as well as in medicine, fre-
quendy leads pracddoners from the path of prudence. One remedy
after another is blazoned forth to the world, to delude merely for a day,
and then to sink with its predecessors, into “ the tomb of all the Capu-
lets.” Surgery, however, is much less liable to these deceptions than
the medical branch of our profession, because surgery is a science re-
quiring more solid information, and in which impositions are much
more easy of detection. It often occurs that the exaggerated statements
which accompany new remedies, lead surgeons to expect more advan-
tages from their employment than the experience of the discoverer, if
he had spoken truly, would have led them to anticipate. Now, in con-
sequence of this, medicine often sinks below that level where their in-
trinsic value would justly entitle them to remain. I make these re-
marks in reference to the use of caustic for the cure of stricture, origi-
nally adopted by Mr. Hunter, afterwards improved upon by Sir Everard
Home, and, subsequently, the mode of treatment was altered by another
gentleman, now deceased : and, since his time, it has been falling into
disrepute. Theuse of caustic has certainly been very much abused, and,
in many instances, has produced the very worst consequences, and I
would say that it never ought to be employed, except where the stricture
is accompanied with fistula in perinaeo, and that fistula behind the stric-
ture ; then there can be no apprehension of the caustic occasioning reten-
tion of urine, which it has done in many instances, when injudiciously
employed. Caution is necessary in the use of nitrate of silver, to prevent
its getting in contact with any other parts than where its presence is ab-
solutely necessary ; and let me advise you not to use the caustic alkali
as a substitute for lunar caustic ; it is much too soluble, and, b/ running
over an extended surface, is calculated to produce a great degree of in-
flammation. 1 have known eight applications of the lunar caustic com-
pletely succeed in curing stricture, when every other means had failed ;
in this case there was a fistula in perinaeo behind the stricture.

I have now to make two or three observations on the consequences
of introducing bougies : here is a preparation (holding it up), in

R R



453



ON ABSCESSES IN THE URETHRA.



which you see the bougie forced out of the urethra into the scrotum,
just by the bulb ; here is another preparation in which the bougie was
forced into the bulb itself. Now, whenever you suspect a tear of the
urethra in passing a bougie, immediately withdraw the instrument, and
desire the patient, if possible, to retain his urine, that it may not irritate
the wound, and also to prevent its escaping through the opening, and
becoming extravasated in the surrounding cellular substance. In this
way you give time for a clot of blood to form over the surface of the
wound — a slight degree of inflammation is excited, and it becomes
healed by the adhesive process, without any further mischief. Another
circumstance I wish to mention to you is, that the passing of a bougie
is sometimes attended with very considerable hemorrhage from the
urethra. A practitioner once called upon me in a great hurry, but whose
name I will not mention, for I do not wish to hurt him, although he is
not at all calculated to practice surgery ; well, this person called upon
me, and requested me to go immediately and see a patient of his, who
had a profuse bleeding from the penis, occasioned by the introduction of
a bougie. I went and found as he had stated ; I pressed a roller upon the
perineum, which instantly checked the flow of blood. A short time
afterwards I was sent for to the same patient, from the hemorrhage hav-
ing returned ; this gentleman had been lounging before the fire, with a
foot on each side of the chimney-piece ; the warmth coming in contact
with the perineum, had brought on a renewal of the hemorrhage. I
now made an incision upon the part, and divided the artery of the bulb ;
this operation completely succeeded, and the bleeding was permanently
subdued.

LECTURE LVII.

The first subject of this evening’s lecture will be

ABSCESSES IN THE LACUN-ffi OF THE URETHRA.

After the violence of the gonorrhoeal inflammation has subsided, you
frequently feel along the under surface of the urethra a number of small
knotty tumours ; these, in the course of a short time, successively dis-
charge themselves into the urethra, and the swellings then subside.
Sometimes these little abscesses break externally to the urethra, thus
forming a double swelling ; but the most frequent situation of abscesses
of the urethra from gonorrhoea, is in the lacuna magna, opposite to the
frsenum. These abscesses likewise form between the lacuna and scro-
tum. When you feel an abscess moving about in the scrotum, and that
abscess occurring after the inflammation attending gonorrhoea, you may



ON ABSCESSES IN THE URETHRA.



459



be pretty sure that it has been formed in the lacuna;, opposite the scro-
tum, and will prove troublesome to the practitioner, and dangerous to
the patient; for, in this situation, abscess will frequently form, until
the patient sinks under the long continuance and severity of the disease.

The next situation in which we find abscesses that are produced by
the same cause is in the perinaeum, giving rise to swellings there of con-
siderable magnitude: the inflammation passes down the urethra, giving
rise to great pain in making water, and still greater pain after having
passed it. If the inflammation be not checked in its progress, it will
give birth to these abscesses, which, if permitted to remain, will, at
length, break through the integuments, and matter and urine will be
discharged through the opening. The passage leading from the exter-
nal wound to the internal is exceedingly tortuous, so that upon intro-
ducing a probe, that probe will not directly enter the urethra ; indeed,
you will find some difficulty in getting it there, from the winding and
irregular course of the canal which the matter has formed : the nature
of the wound will at once show you that the urine may easily become
extravasated into the cellular membrane of the neighbouring parts.
Abscesses of this description will sometimes give rise to retention of
urine : a man thus circumstanced was brought into the other hospital :
upon passing the catheter, I felt something unusual while introducing
it, which led me to examine the perinasum ; I there found one of these
abscesses, and, opening it with a lancet, gave the patient immediate
relief. This, then, will prove one source of retention of urine, and it
is caused by the pressure which the abscess makes upon the urethra.

The further extension of the inflammation will be the means of pro-
ducing abscesses in the follicles of the prostate gland ; these likewise
will occasion retention of urine, and, upon introducing a catheter to re-
lieve this, it occasionally occurs that the catheter will enter an abscess,
and a considerable quantity of matter will pass through it before any
urine makes its escape ; at length, after the whole of the matter has
been evacuated, the cause of the retention having been removed, the
urine can then be freely expelled from the bladder. It now and then
occurs that the two last varieties of abscess I have mentioned, by being
neglected, have led to the formation of fistula in ano ; the true character
of the fistula will be learnt by observing that there run from it at dif-
ferent periods a few drops of urine; this will, of course, convince you it
is connected with the bladder.

Treatment . — Abscesses of the lacunas of the urethra arising from
gonorrhceal inflammation should be continually poulticed until the
matter is discharged. After you are satisfied that it has once formed,
it is not right to let the abscesses break of themselves. When, there-



460



ON ABSCESSES IN THE URETHRA.



fore, the hard knot that you feel in the urethra becomes converted into
a fluctuating tumour connected with the skin covering it, the sooner
you open it the better. When the abscesses are situated in the lacuna;
opposite to the scrotum, the treatment must be exceedingly prompt ;
for if it be not, you will endanger the life of the patient. Into these
abscesses make early and free incisions ; let your incisions be of con-
siderable size, and a great deal larger externally than internally. I
generally make these incisions in the middle of the septum, at the an-
terior part of the scrotum. Now, when you are called to cases of
abscesses in perinseo, it is necessary that you should be particularly
decisive in your management of these complaints, for the purpose of
guarding against that troublesome and dangerous disease, fistula in
perinseo ; for, owing to a variety of circumstances, it is extremely
difficult to cure. When called to a case of abscess in perinaeo, the best
plan of treatment that you can pursue, is immediately to introduce a
catheter, made of elastic gum, (which is much less likely to injure the
patient than a metallic one ;) this will relieve the retention, and obviate
much irritation ; apply leeches and evaporating lotions to the swelling,
and keep the bowels open by cooling laxatives. Well, if these measures
should not succeed in dispelling the tumour, the moment that you can
distinctly feel fluctuation, you should make such an opening with the
lancet as will allow the matter to escape, to prevent its burrowing the
skin, and producing additional mischief it will save the patient much
pain, and will probably lead to the speedy cure of the disease, which
might otherwise prove not only protracted, but fatal. Remember, you
are not only to open the abscess early, but keep introduced in the
bladder an elastic gum catheter. An abscess of this description, very
much neglected, has been known to break into the rectum, and the
urine to be afterwards discharged through the unnatural course. In the
treatment of abscesses of the lacuna of the urethra and perineum, it is
of the utmost importance that you should attend to the state of the
patient’s general health ; for these abscesses often form in broken con-
stitutions, and it is impossible that you can cure them while the system
is in a depraved and debilitated state ; you should, therefore, prescribe
alterative tonic medicines, nutritive diet, and country air; attention to
the state of the constitution will sometimes cure these abscesses, after
every local remedy has failed.

Abscesses of the perinseum are often produced from the unskilful
manner in which catheters and bougies are sometimes introduced, and
by using bougies of too large or too small a size.

There are some cases of strictures so bad, so obstinate, that, use what
instrument you will, and with all possible care, yet you will not succeed



ON ABSCESSES IN THE URETHRA.



461



in overcoming the resistance. You must recollect the case lately in the
other hospital, where I was under the necessity of cutting down upon a
stricture, and immediately behind which was a urinary calculus ; upon
searching a little further I found a second, and then the catheter passed
with ease into the bladder.

Well, I mentioned to you, at another part of the lecture, that urinary
fistula in ano sometimes exist, and that the introduction of a catheter
into the bladder is not sufficient to cure them, as the urine will, not-
withstanding, still continue to escape by the sinuous opening. Urinary
fistula in ano is fistula in perinaso and fistula in ano blended. The first
case of the kind that I ever saw, was in a gentleman from Kent ; two
surgeons attended him, one of whom was myself. The other surgeon
injected the sinus ; the patient was directed frequently to introduce a
catheter : he came to town a short time afterwards, and told me that he
continued to pass the catheter for six weeks, when, concluding that he
was cured, he ceased to employ it. The urine, however, returned by
its former course, and he again came to town for the purpose, if possible,
of getting the unpleasant disease cured. What I did, was to make the
same incision in the perineum, as is made by the lateral stone operation :
my object was to divide the sinus into two ; this succeeded in producing
a complete cure.

The next subject to which I shall direct your attention, is

EXTRAVASATION OF URINE FROM BURSTING OF THE
URETHRA.

This can never happen without the grossest neglect on the part of
either the medical man or the patient, unless, indeed, the patient be in
a situation where he cannot obtain medical assistance ; as individuals,
for example, on board ships that do not carry surgeons. It is a very
dangerous complaint, and one that is always to be dreaded. I wish
there was some legislative enactment to compel the commander of every
vessel going a voyage of any distance, to take a surgeon with him. If
such a law were in force, we should see very few cases of this descrip-
tion, for the subjects of them are generally unfortunate sailors, who
have been so situated that they were incapable of procuring medical
advice. You may see these poor fellows often brought into the hospital
in the most horrid condition from rupture of the urethra, and the escape
of the urine into the cellular membrane of the surrounding parts ; the
scrotum, in these cases, is of a purple colour, and extremely distended.
\ ou probably make an incision in the scrotum, for the purpose of dis-
charging the urine : sometimes this will be successful ; but, at others,
the entire scrotum will slough, together with a considerable portion of

r it 2



462



SPASMODIC AFFECTIONS.



the surrounding parts : nor is this always the worst that happens, for
it frequently terminates in death. All these calamities might have been
prevented by proper treatment ; and when you see a case of this de-
scription, you should immediately make into the scrotum an incision of
at least two inches in length : this incision should be in a direction
upwards, and backward towards the nates ; this opening will permit
the urine to escape, and the irritation and inflammation which com-
monly take place, would be, by this simple practice, completely ob-
viated. This, then, is the method you are to adopt: — make a free
incision, for the purpose of allowing the extravasated urine to flow out;
attend to the stricture which was the cause of the accident, and your
patient will stand a fair chance of recovery. Where patients have sur-
gical attendants, I again repeat, that this accident ought never to occur.
I shall now say a few words to you respecting

SPASMODIC AND INFLAMMATORY STRICTURES.

The spasmodic stricture is usually, I believe, more or less connected
with permanent stricture ; and I am of opinion that the spasms com-
monly attack the muscular part of the urethra. Spasmodic stricture
may arise from various causes, and attacks individuals of all ages : so
recently as yesterday, I saw a little boy, of only four years of age, the
subject of it. Common accidents, as fracture and dislocation, will
sometimes give rise to spasmodic stricture ; even an operation for aneu-
rism will generate to such a degree of irritation as to produce it.

Spasmodic stricture is generally unattended with pain. I mention this
the more particularly, because the inflammatory stricture and the spas-
modic have been confounded ; whereas, the one being unaccompanied
with pain, and the other having it .distressingly severe, is surely suffi-
cient to mark the diseases as completely distinct : even an irritated state
of mind, or a mind deeply engaged in study, will occasionally influence
the nervous system to such a degree, as to produce spasmodic stricture
of the urethra. This complaint usually comes on of a sudden, is un-
mixed with pain, and the first notice that a patient has of it is, that he
experiences a difficulty in voiding his urine.

Treatment of Spasmodic Stricture . — You should introduce a bougie,
letting it steal gently along the urinary passage ; and when it arrives at
the strictured part, there let it rest for a short time; after this, you
should gradually push it forward, using only a very slight force, but
continuing that force until you have succeeded in passing the stricture.
Let the bougie rest for a minute or two in the strictured part, and then
withdraw it ; directly that you do so, the person will be enabled freely to
pass his urine. If you have not a bougie at hand, you may employ a



ON INFLAMMATORY STRICTURE.



463



catheter, and it will answer equally well ; you must take care, however,
to use it gently, as I have just described. Other means are adopted,
as the exhibition of calomel and opium ; antimony has also been given
with a view of producing sickness and general relaxation ; the warm
bath has been also employed with the same view, as has the tobacco
glyster. Mr. Cline employed the muriated tincture of iron with decided
advantage ; he gave five or ten drops every two or three hours, and it
succeeded, when every other means had been found unsuccessful. I
have already mentioned to you that the warm bath is a remedy em-
ployed for this complaint. I now tell you, that the cold bath has like-
wise been had recourse to, and with the most decided advantage ; at this
apparent contradiction you are probably surprised ; however, such is the
fact. Mr. Robert Pew, when studying at these hospitals, was attend-
ing a gentleman in Bishopsgate-street, who had spasmodic stricture.
Mr. Pew (and I mention it to his credit, for it shewed a reflecting
mind), recollecting that an immersion of his body in cold water, always
caused him to expel the contents of his bladder, recommended his pa-
tient to jump into a cistern of cold water that was standing in the yard
of his house. He did so, and the experiment completely succeeded;
there was perfect retention before the immersion, but after it the urine
was expelled with the utmost facility.

There are some very anomalous cases of spasmodic stricture. Mr.
Western, a surgeon, was in a chemist’s shop, into which a man came,
and asked for half a pint of lime-water ; this he immediately drank.
Upon being questioned as to what he took it for, he said that it was to
relieve a retention of urine produced by stricture. The lime-water
relieved him, for, immediately after taking it, he passed his urine;
Owing to constitutional peculiarities, medicines that will be successful
with one patient, will ’fail in another. You must, therefore, have re-
course to all, until the object be gained.

INFLAMMATORY STRICTURE.

This is equally quick in its approach with the common spasmodic,
but unlike it in being accompanied with excessive pain. A man will
consult you with this complaint, and will tell you he has the most inor-
dinate desire to make water, but cannot. After having prescribed for
him, and he has left your house, he will return again in a few minutes,
and say that he is in the most excruciating pain, and cannot bear it any
longer ; this kind of stricture is generally produced by the inflammation
of gonorrhcca, but there is another mode by which it is caused, and that
is the introduction of a bougie; for the passing of these, although dona



464



INFLAMMATION OF

with care, will sometimes give rise to a violent inflammation of the
urethra.

Treatment . — When a person comes to you having retention of urine,
with dreadful pain in the urethra, you should immediately take blood
from the arm, in such quantity as to produce syncope, administer pur-
gatives, apply leeches to the perinseum, and put the patient into a warm
bath ; you will also, in this complaint, find antimony and opium in a
state of combination particularly serviceable. It is highly improper
to introduce either a bougie or catheter, while the urethra is in the in-
flamed state just described ; if used with judgment and decision, the
means I have stated will be sufficient to procure relief. There some-
times exists an

IIUUTABLE STATE OF THE URETHRA.

If attended with inflammation, it is of the chronic kind. Persons
having this complaint have a frequent desire to make water. This dis-
order may be cured by giving, three times a-day, an eighth part of a
grain of the oxymuriate of mercury, and a drachm of the nitrous spirit
of aether ; these may be taken in any convenient vehicle, should be con-
tinued for a little time, and the complaint will disappear.



LECTURE LVIII.

The first subject on which I shall this evening engage your attention
is enlargement of the prostate gland. There are three species of disease,
exclusive of the formation of calculi, by which this gland is affected ;
now the one which I shall first describe to you, is

ACUTE INFLAMMATION OF THE PROSTATE GLAND.

This complaint is not confined, like the chronic enlargement, to late
periods of life, but attacks persons of any age, and generally terminates
in suppuration. The most prominent symptom which characterizes
this complaint, is violent pain immediately after discharging the urine,
and in this respect the disease resembles stone. As the inflammation ad-
vances, an abscess in the prostate produces retention of urine ; this may
be relieved by a common catheter, it will answer the purpose well, and
for this disorder the prostatic catheter will not be necessary. You there-
fore pass a common catheter, and about the fourth day you will perceive
that matter escapes through it, and at which time your patient will be
greatly relieved. The



THE PROSTATE GLAND.



465



Medical Treatment of Acute Inflammation of the Prostate Gland ,
consists in taking blood from the arm, and administering mild laxa-
tives, together with antimonial medicines. Generally speaking, the
disease is not so clearly manifested by the symptoms as to satisfy your
mind of its true nature, until the matter escapes by the catheter : this,
coupled with the other appearances, stamp its true character. Rigors
do not attend the formation of this matter. The next kind of enlarged
prostate that I shall describe to you, may be called

THE CHRONIC INFLAMMATION.

It is the consequence of age, and not of disease ; when this affection
produces partial retention of urine, it should be considered as a salutary
process, for it prevents incontinence of urine, which, in old people,
would almost constantly take place, were it not for this preventive. It
makes the urine pass slower than natural ; but this may be excused,
when it is the means of preventing a continual wetting of the clothes.
Well, then,, the first circumstance by which you know that an old per-
son has chronic enlargement of the prostate gland, is the length of time
he requires for the purpose of voiding his urine. All of you must have
observed that an old gentleman is twice as long, when engaged in this
process, as a young one ; and this is the first thing that attracts the pa-
tient’s attention. Well, the next thing noticed is, that the urine has a
particularly powerful smell, which arises frfim its being ammoniated,
in consequence of some urine remaining in the bladder after each dis-
charge. Remember, therefore, that iu this complaint the whole of the
water, each time it is attempted to be expelled, does not pass away.
The next symptoms observable, are pain and numbness in the glans
penis ; the prepuce not possessing its usual sensibility, sense of weight
and uneasiness in the perinamm, relieved by pressure with the finger ;
pain in the back of one or both thighs, in the loins, and at the origin
of the sciatic nerve, and course of the ureters ; the faeces are flattened,
the reason of which is, that pressure has been made upon the rectum
by the swollen gland. Persons having enlarged prostate for any length
of time, generally have likewise prolapsus ani, and hemorrhoids : when
the enlargement of the gland is considerable, the patient will kneel,
resting upon his hands, with his knees widely distended, and thus con-
tinue for a tedious time, passing only a few drops of urine, after the
most persevering efforts, and with the most excruciating pain. Besides
what I have already stated, the ammoniacal smell of the urine, as the
disease advances, becomes highly offensive, and at length the urine
itself becomes white or milky ; this appearance shews that the inflam-
mation has extended to the mucous membrane of the bladder. If the



466



INFLAMMATION OF



urine be much retained, it has the appearance of coffee, occasioned by
an admixture of blood with it ; this leads many practitioners to sup-
pose, for the moment, that the case is one of stone ; but, if you question
the patient, your doubts on this point will be very satisfactorily removed.
If you desire him to stand up, and jump firmly on the floor, he will do
so ; if you ask him whether he can ride over a rough road without much
pain, he will tell you that he can ; such doings and replies as these you
would not obtain from a patient having stone.

At length the enlargement of the prostate, in many cases, will pro-
ceed until it occasions complete retention of urine ; this, however, may
be the effect of retaining more urine in the bladder, and for a longer
period, than it ought ; or it may have been the result of checked per-
spiration, either from cold weather, or from having imprudently laid
aside some flannel covering ; when the retention has been brought about
by either of these latter mentioned causes, in conjunction with an en-
larged prostate. Exciting on such persons a copious perspiration, will
often afford relief.

When you introduce a catheter into the bladder of a patient having
chronic enlargement of the prostate, you will find the urine of a very
high colour, and of an exceedingly offensive smell. Well, then, such
are the symptoms which accompany this kind of enlargement of the
prostate gland ; at least, they are such as I witness. Upon dissection
of those who have died of this disease (and, without dissection, we know
nothing at all of the matter), the prostate is found enlarged sometimes
laterally, but most frequently the enlargement is in the posterior part,
situated in the middle, or third lobe. Well, as the prostate enlarges,
it is pushed forward ; in consequence of which the urethra becomes
curved immediately before the apex of the prostate ; indeed, the coming
forward of the prostate causes the urethra almost to double upon itself ;
the curve thus formed, is at the symphysis pubis; and it is in this
situation that the difficulty on passing the catheter in diseased pros-
tate is found. Tracing on the course of the urethra, behind the curved
part, that canal is seen much enlarged ; the next thing we notice is, that
the urethra itself is considerably elongated, that is, from an inch and a
half to two inches ; which increase of length is behind the pubes, and
it is owing to this circumstance that you are under the necessity of car-
rying on the catheter so great a distance after its point has passed the
arch of the pubes. Well, then, as to the prostate itself, we find that it
may increase to a most enormous size laterally, without giving rise to
retention of urine. But that enlargement which occurs posteriorly in
the third lobe (and which you have an opportunity of observing in the
preparation now passing round the theatre), frequently occasions reten-



THE PROSTATE GLAND.



467



tion of urine, for the enlargement is situated immediately behind the
orifice of the urethra ; thus the urine collects behind the swelling^
presses it upon the mouth of the urethra, and forms a complete barrier
to its passage. It is of great importance for you to understand this ;
indeed, a correct knowledge of the morbid anatomy of the parts is alto-
gether of consequence, because, if you have not this information, you
would find the greatest difficulty in the introduction of the catheter ;
whereas, if you possess it, there will be no difficulty at all, and the
urine may be drawn off with the greatest facility. It was owing to the
imperfect knowledge of the anatomy of these parts that retention of
urine formerly proved so often fatal, which occurrence is now very, very
rare ; the reason is, that within the last forty years frequent dissections
have caused these diseases to be well understood, and an improved mode
of treatment has been the result. Well, then, although the enlargement
of the middle lobe of the prostate will give rise to retention of urine, by
plugging up the orifice of the urethra, yet the lateral enlargement,
although of great magnitude, does not produce any such effect. That
you may be enabled perfectly to comprehend what I have been stating
to you, I will send round for your inspection different specimens of the
diseases 1 have noticed. (The learned lecturer here delivered several
preparations to the students.)

Well, gentlemen, behind the prostate we frequently find sacs formed
in the coats of the bladder : here is a preparation in which you see nine :
here is another with, I believe, as many. These sacs are produced in
the following manner : — the muscular fibres of the bladder give way, and
between these fibres the mucous membrane protrudes ; thus, in reality
the sacs are elongations of the mucous membrane.

We also find the bladder much enlarged in this disease ; as also the
ureters and the pelvis of the kidneys.

How, then, when diseased prostate exists, are you to know it? what
are the diagnostic signs ? Why, the enlargement laterally may be rea-
dily ascertained by introducing the finger into the rectum ; but the en-
largement of the middle lobe cannot be so learnt. In what way, then ?
Why, by the introduction of a catheter or bougie, and the latter is the
best ; it will be found to stop suddenly : you are then to introduce a ca-
theter, for the purpose of drawing off the water; the instrument will be
resisted in its common course, and you must depress the handle a good
deal, with a view of tilting its point over the enlarged gland ; thus the
end of the instrument will be rising perpendicularly, as it were, behind
the pubes.

These, then, are the means you arc to employ to obtain a correct diag-
nosis. Now, with regard to the cause of retention of urine, in those



468



INFLAMMATION OF



cases of enlargement of the prostate, where the disease exists in the
third lobe, it generally arises from the urine having been allowed to re-
main in the bladder for too long a period, thus collecting in so large a
quantity that the swollen lobe is pressed forward against the mouth of
the urethra, and thus closes the entrance to that canal.

With regard to the causes of enlargement of the prostate, it is often
the result of libidinous age ; old people frequently feel a greater degree
of excitement than the constitution is capable of supporting, and disease
is the consequence ; powerful excitement is by no means desirable for
aged individuals.

I shall next proceed to consider the

Treatment of Enlarged Prostate . — Very little can be effected here
by medicine ; it is a disease over which medicii.es have but very slight
influence ; you may, however, give the oxymuriate of mercury in very
small quantities, for I believe I have seen it beneficial. But this is the
treatment only for the enlargement of the gland. Well, but when re-
tention of urine takes place, what plan of treatment are you to adopt
then ? When no urine whatever can be passed, and when there is great
pain at the neck of the bladder ? Why, you must take blood from the
arm, apply leeches to the perinaeum, administer purgatives, and put the
patient into a warm bath.

If these means should succeed in procuring relief, the best medicine
that can afterwards be given for the purpose of preventing a return of
the retention, and at the same time of lessening the inconvenience which
sometimes attends the complaint, is composed of fifteen drops of the
liquor, potasste, five drops of bals. copaib. and an ounce and a half of
mist, camphor. If you give fifteen or twenty drops of the balsam, it
then produces a stimulating effect, and does harm ; administer it in the
quantity that I have just mentioned to you, in conjunction with the

other medicines, to which you may add 5ij. Mucilag. Gu. Acac I was

attending with Dr. Key, a gentleman from the country having this dis-
ease, and in whom it proved a source of much annoyance : we at first
gave him ten drops of the balsam, with the other medicines ; this quan-
tity, however, was found too stimulating, the dose was reduced to seven
drops, and ultimately to five ; after continuing it for a short time, we
had the pleasure of sending this gentleman back to the country very
much relieved. This medicine is by far the best remedy for this com-
plaint that I am acquainted with. Other medicines, as the carbonates
of soda and magnesia, the liquor, potassee, and opium, are occasionally
given ; but, as the latter produces costiveness, it is decidedly improper.

I can assure you, with much confidence, that the first medicine I de-
scribed to you will be found the best. It will afford considerable relief,



THE PROSTATE GLAND. 469

which is all that you can expect, for you must not dream of making a
cure.

When you are called upon to relieve retention of urine, from en-
larged prostate, by the introduction of a catheter, the instrument should
be fourteen inches in length, and a quarter of an inch in diameter. In
consequence of the pressure within, a broad instrument will answer
better than a narrow one, for being bulbous at the end, it will readily
ride over the enlargement. When introducing the catheter, you will
meet with no difficulty until you reach the curve, which the enlargement
of the gland has produced in the urethra ; the handle of the instrument
is to be here slightly raised, for the purpose of insinuating the point
through the curved part. Having passed this, you are then to depress
the handle completely between the thighs, so as to occasion the point of
the instrument immediately to rise perpendicularly above the pubes.
Well, then, there is no other difficulty of introducing the catheter in this
disease more than is experienced under ordinary circumstances. Recol-
lect, after having passed the curved part of the urethra (the situation of
which I have already explained to you), you are then to depress the
handle as much as you possibly can ; this will cause the point to enter
the bladder between the pubes and enlarged lobe.

If any gentleman within these walls should ever be under the necessity
of puncturing the bladder for enlarged prostate, which I trust in God
he will not, it must be done above the pubes ; but it never need be
attempted at all, if you can perform your duty. I have known enlarged
prostate occasionally occur in very young people ; an instance of this
kind happened in the other hospital : a boy was admitted, having symp-
toms of stone : but, before I say more of this, while I think of it, I
want to add a few words on the treatment of diseased prostate. An
elastic gum catheter is sometimes introduced into the bladder, and kept
there : in passing an elastic gum catheter, the removal of the stilette will
sometimes cause it to enter with ease, when it would not previously pass
at all. If it be deemed requisite to leave the catheter in the bladder, I
should prefer one of pewter rather than elastic gum, for it can be
curved down before the scrotum, and, by plugging up the end, the pa-
tient may move about as he likes, and, at any time he wishes, can
expel his urine. Thus the instrument becomes productive of great com-
fort. Let me observe to you, that if you employ a pewter catheter, it
should be quite new, and ought not to be worn for a longer period than
a fortnight, for the urine acts upon the metal, renders it brittle, and may
probably cause the instrument to snap, if the time be extended beyond
what I have stated.

I just now mentioned to you, in reference to young persons having

s s



470



ON IRRITABLE BLADDER.



enlarged prostate, that a boy was admitted into the other hospital, hav-
ing symptoms of stone, in consequence of which he was sounded, and
the operation of lithotomy was about to be performed: the sounding,
however, brought on inflammation of the bladder, which terminated in
the boy’s death: upon dissection, it was found that the symptoms for
which he had been sounded, were produced by an enlarged prostate
gland.

I have one other observation to make : persons will come to you for
some supposed complaint in the bladder, and, upon inquiry, they will
tell you, that they can pass their urine ; now, if the disease consists of
enlarged prostate, some urine will still remain ; desire them, therefore,
to make water, and then introduce the catheter : if the case be one of
enlarged prostate, you will be enabled to draw off from half a pint to a
pint of urine, having a strong ammoniacal smell. A gentleman, about
six weeks since, called upon me, whose case was similar to what I have
just stated : — on inquiry as to whether he had passed his urine, he told
me he had just done so : upon introducing the catheter, I drew from his
bladder a pint of urine, having a highly offensive ammoniacal smell.
You have only to teach a patient who is thus circumstanced how to in-
troduce the catheter for himself, and his danger will be at an end.

The last circumstance connected with the prostate which I have to
mention to you, is that you will sometimes find

FUNGOUS POLYPI

growing from its base. Here is a preparation, in which you have an
opportunity of seeing the nature of the disease, and here is another
of the same description ; this specimen was taken from a man who
lived in the neighbourhood of the hospitals. A catheter was passed
into the bladder of this man, in consequence of retention of urine. For
nearly the whole of the day on which the instrument was introduced, he
expelled nothing but blood ; other attacks succeeding this, at length he
died. The preparation now before you was taken from his bladder. I
am not aware of any plan of treatment that is likely to be successful for
the removal of this disease ; it appears to be entirely out of our reach.



LECTURE LIX.

The first subject of which I shall speak, is

IRRITABLE BLADDER.

During the latter stage of gonorrhoea, it often happens that the patient b



ON IRRITABLE BLADDER.



471



annoyed by a frequent desire to void his urine; this symptom at length
becomes so urgent, that the inclination to empty the bladder occurs as
often as every ten minutes or quarter of an hour. The pain that the
patient feels is in exact proportion to the quantity of urine contained in
the bladder, the greater the quantity, the more severe will be the pain.
Sometimes in this complaint the urine will be mixed with blood ; this
appearance is calculated to deceive you, and excite a suspicion of the
existence of stone, and induce you to pass a sound for the purpose of
satisfying your doubts : now in this disease the introduction of an in-
strument into the bladder is highly improper, as it would produce addi-
tional irritation. The mode by which you can distinguish irritable blad-
der from stone, is this : attend to the state of the bladder when the
patient is in pain, and when he enjoys a repose, if the case be one of
irritable bladder, there will be no pain after the expulsion of the urine ;
on the other hand, if the case be stone, after the expulsion of the water
then pain will be felt. By attending to this you may readily distinguish
one complaint from the other. In irritable bladder, therefore, the pain
is felt when the bladder is full ; in case of calculus, the pain tortures
when nothing but the stone remains. Sometimes the disease goes on to
produce ulceration of the bladder; the urine will then be mixed with
blood; there will likewise be a discharge of bloody mucus, and the in-
clination to void the urine will be more frequent, and exceedingly urgent.
Cancer of the uterus is probably a more painful complaint than any
other ; but, with the exception of that disorder, I am not acquainted
with a single one which tortures to such a degree as ulcerated bladder.
Irritable bladder of itself is a dreadful disorder, the patient’s life is a
burthen to him, he is obliged to keep from society, and linger away his
tedious hours in solitude. This disease, formidable as it is, may be
brought on by very slight causes ; even the retention of the urine, from
motives of delicacy, beyond the period when there was a desire to dis-
charge it, has been known to give birth to this horrible affliction. A
young gentleman, with a party of ladies, was about to leave them for the
purpose of making water, at the moment when the latter called their
carriage ; he thought at the moment that it would be indelicate to with-
draw, and accordingly got into the carriage, having at the time a strong
desire to pass his urine ; in the greatest agony he rode twelve miles
with his bladder full, at which time, having arrived at the end of their
journey, he endeavoured to make water, when, to his utter astonish-
ment, he could not void a drop ; a surgeon was sent for, who took away
the urine by means of a catheter ; this afforded relief ; but irritable
bladder followed, then the suppurative process, and at last the sufferer



472



ON IRRITABLE BLADDER.



died from exhaustion. Upon Dissection of those who die of irritable
bladder, the mucous membrane has been found in a state of extreme
vascularity ; the quantity of blood in the vessels rendering it as florid
as red velvet. A respectable surgeon, of Finsbury-square, attended a
patient for another disease, of which he died : the individual had, how-
ever, for a long period been the subject of irritable bladder, and, on
examining the body, the disease had been so protracted, that ulcerated
spots were seen in different parts, and the mucous membrane had nearly
been removed ; that part which remained, was uncommonly vascular,
and resembled the tunica conjunctiva when under the influence of acute
inflammation. I can state to you that irritable bladder is sometimes
the result of gonorrhoeal inflammation ; at others is caused by retaining
the urine too long. Now then, as to the

Treatment . — Your first object should be to keep the bladder in a
state of rest ; nothing can be done without it. Opium should be given
in doses of from one to two grains, with a view of allaying the pain and
irritation, and with the same object five or six grains should be intro-
duced into the rectum, in the form of suppositories. You may also
administer opium in conjunction with the liquor, potassae ; as the
former, however, occasions costiveness, you had better combine the
latter with some bitter tincture. A confined state of the bowels is to be
obviated by the exhibition of castor oil. After shaving off the hair, a
blister should be applied over the region of the pubes; the counter irri-
tation thus produced will prove of infinite service. There is a foolish
prejudice against the use of blisters in complaints of the bladder, from
a belief that the cantharides become absorbed — this is a false theory.

To keep the bladder in a state of rest, a short catheter should be
kept introduced ; the instrument should only just enter the bladder;
you know that the length of the urethra scarcely ever varies from nine
inches ; consequently you have no difficulty in knowing the length of the
instrument that you ought to pass : a flexible catheter is the one that
you are to employ, and after sufficient has been introduced, the remain-
der may be cut off; it should be tied to a bandage carried between the
thighs and round the loins. The instrument thus used will afford great
ease, and keep the bladder at rest, by allowing the urine to escape as
fast as it streams from the ureters ; thus keeping the bladder continually
empty. If the bladder should be ulcerated, it ought not to prevent this
method of treatment; on the contrary, it is the best that can be adopted;
for, by keeping the bladder at rest, you afford the sores an opportunity
of healing ; this, then, is the treatment for irritable and ulcerated blad-
der. Of



DISEASE OF THE BLADDER.



473



MUCOUS DISEASE OF THE BLADDER,

Or, it might be denominated, catarrh of the bladder. This disease
is known by the discharge from the urethra of an enormous quantity
of ropy mucus ; it is so thick, that it will hang to the sides of the vessel,
and is of a yellow colour. It is produced from the internal surface of
the kidneys, ureters, and bladder. I this morning saw a gentleman hav-
ing this complaint, and it had existed for two years. The

Treatment is as follows : — Introduce a short catheter, as in the last
case : let your medical treatment consist in the exhibition of oxymur.
hydrarg. gr. 1 ter die ; and likewise three times a-day you should give
3j. spir. aether, nitrici in § iss mist, camphor. Persons having this
disease should drink plentifully of soda water. But the best remedy
that they can possibly take is the balsam of copaiba; no medicine so com-
pletely robs the urine of mucus as this. Eight or ten drops three times
a-day will usually be found quite sufficient : it may be given in conjunc-
tion with the medicines before-mentioned, or in 3ij mucilag. gumi acac.
et 3x aq. font.

PARALYSIS OF THE BLADDER.

Now and then a paralytic state of the bladder occurs. In early life,
a case of this kind for the moment very much surprised me : a man
came to my house, stating that he could not make water. I made him
lie down on three chairs, and then, without the least difficulty, intro-
duced a catheter; but, to my astonishment, not a drop of urine came
away : and I was the more astonished, as I could distinctly feel the
instrument above the pubes. I desired him to rise from the chairs ant}
stand up : well, the moment he did so, the urine directly began to flow in
a full stream ; this arose from the weight of the super-incumbent viscera
pressing on the bladder ; and although the urine flowed freely while in
the erect posture, yet, when the body was horizontal, not a drop would
escape. He was cured by blistering the loins, and by giving him a pill
twice a-day, composed of five grains of the chio turpentine, and a quar-
ter of a grain of powdered cantharides: by these means, the voluntary
power of the bladder became restored.

It occasionally happens that persons will be troubled by frequent
bleedings from the kidneys. I knew a female who was annoyed in this
way for more than three months.

Treatment . — In these cases you must order the recumbent posture to
be rigidly adhered to, in order to give the vessels an opportunity of
closing. The bals. copaib. should also be prescribed in small doses.
The diet should be low : recollect there must be no change from the

s s 2



474



CHORDEE.



recumbent posture until some time after the bleedings have ceased; and
deviations from this rule will frustrate your curative intentions.

The next disease to which I shall direct your attention is

CHOBDEE.

The name may make some of you smile, at least those of you who
have not felt it. A chordee is a painful erection of the penis ; and,
during the erection, the penis is drawn either violently back, or to one
side. The cause of the complaint is an inflammatory condition of the
corpus spongiosum, and the pain is produced by the dilatation of the
vessels, from the influx of blood, to cause an erection. The disease is
most troublesome at night, when the patient is warm in bed ; and one
ingenious gentleman, with a view to keep the parts cool, invented a tube
to pass between the legs, under the clothes, to the outside of the bed, for
the purpose of admitting a current of cold air. The

Treatment consists in the application of poultices, fomentations, and
leeches. During the night the penis may be enveloped with linen,
wetted with the lotion plumb, subacet. Evaporating lotions may also
beemployed ; the best medicine that you can give is thus formed :

J^.. Liquor, potass, m. xx.

Extr. conii. gr. iij.

Mist, camph. 3x.

Ft. haust It should be taken three times a day, and will be attended

witlithe best effects. Calomel and opium may also be administered
with much advantage. You may give a pill every night, composed of
a grain of calomel, a grain of opium, and two grains of camphor; this
will be found materially to abate the pain, and will be productive of
much comfort. To get rid of the hardness which often remains after
the painful erections have disappeared, you should rub the part with
the ung. hydr. camphorat. and apply some of the same ointment spread
on umbrella silk ; by pursuing this plan of treatment, the hardness
will generally disappear. There is a

CHRONIC CHORDEE.,

Of which I wish to say a few words. It is of this kind : sometimes
after a person has had gonorrhoea very severely, the dorsum of the penis
will become so extremely hard, as, upon examination, to feel ossified.
To remove this hardness, you should direct the limentum. hydrarg. to
be rubbed on the part night and morning ; or you may order it to be
kept covered by a plaster of the cerat. saponis ; this acts like a poultice,
and, when the complaint is recent, will answer very well ; but when of



ON BLEEDINGS OF THE URETHRA. 475



long standing, you must have recourse to the liniment, hydrarg. and
even this will often fail, owing to the extremely thickened state of the
tendinous sheath of the dorsum .

OF BLEEDINGS FROM THE URETHRA.

We are sometimes called to persons having considerable hemorrhage
from the urethra. It sometimes occurs from the rupture of a vessel
during inflammation ; at other times, and more frequently so, it is
caused by the introduction of a catheter or bougie. From whatever
cause it proceed, the

Treatment is very simple : press the finger and thumb upon the
urethra, deep in the perinasum, and observe if you command the bleed-
ing ; if you do not, bring your hand a little nearer towards you : pro-
ceeding carefully in this way, you will at last learn the precise spot
from whence the blood flows, which you will generally find to be from
that part of the urethra opposite the symphysis pubis. If you continue
to press with your finger and thumb for a quarter of an hour or twenty
[ minutes, the bleeding will cease ; but as this would be tedious, and often
inconvenient, a compress placed upon the part, and secured by a roller
carried round the loins, and brought up between the thighs, will answer
I equally well, and perhaps better, as it may be worn for an hour or two
if deemed necessary. I have gone into a room, and found a person
soused all over with water, in consequence of a bleeding of this descrip-
tion ; such a practice is useless and absurd. You may give to the pa-
tient some aperient medicine ; and, to lessen the disposition to hemor-
H rhage, you may take blood from the arm. The next subject to which
I shall call your attention is,

INFLAMMATION OF THE TESTICLE AND EPIDIDYMIS.

This complaint, from an error of pathology, used to be called hernia
humoralis, in consequence of a belief that it arose from a fluxion of
humours to the testicles. The inflammation of the testicles generally
shews itself from within ten to fourteen days after the appearance of the
; gonorrhceal discharge. The first symptom indicative of inflammation
j of the testicles, is a sensation of a drop of urine in the perinteum ; at
[ this time the inflammation is proceeding down the urethra, and, before
| it reaches the testicle, affects the prostate, verumontanum, vasa defe-
| rentia, proceeds up the cord to the abdominal ring, then attacks the epi-
I didymis ; and finally, the testicle itself. While the inflammation is
I confined to the epididymis, the patient feels little or no pain ; but when
I it has passed to the body of the testicle, then there will be felt excessive



476 INFLAMMATION OF THE TESTICLE.

pain, in consequence of the unyielding nature of the tunica albuginea.
I he scrotum is sometimes reddened, arising from the degree of violence
which characterizes the inflammation. The pain does not, generally
speaking, correspond to the continued course of inflammation just now
described to you ; and, in fact, the inflammation itself often appears less
regular in its process. The introduction of a bougie is a common cause
of this complaint ; and let me tell you, that when it gives much pain,
or excites inflammation, it should not be used for three or four days to-
gether ; but, rather, at intervals of three or four days ; the

Treatment to be pursued is, first, to order the patient a suspensory
bandage, (indeed, if the gonorrhoea be at all violent, it is not right to
attempt its cure without one : it will often prove a preventive to in-
flamed testicles). Well, then, first order a suspensory bandage ; give
the patient two or three calomel and colocynth pills ; and, in the morn-
ing, a dose of infusion of senna with sulphate of magnesia. Apply to
the testis a lotion, composed of one ounce of spirits of wine and five
ounces of water; or, muriate of ammonia and water, and a small quan-
tity of the spirit. These means usually succeed in overcoming the dis-
ease ; if they should not, you must take blood from the scrotum, but
not by the application of leeches, at least not in private practice, as the
mess they produce would, in all probability, lead to an exposure of
your patient’s malady ; therefore, what I do is this — I direct the pa-
tient to stand before me, and, making the skin of the scrotum tense, I
open three or four of the veins with the point of the lancet ; then, by
fomenting the scrotum with a little warm water, or directing the patient
to stand before a fire, in five or ten minutes you obtain as much blood
as is requisite, and by then making the patient lie down, the bleeding
will immediately cease : thus, by this method, in a few minutes you
procure more blood than you would in double the time by the applica-
tion of leeches, and without any exposure. The weight of poultices is
an objection to their employment; but fomentations may be prescribed
with advantage, as they unload the vessels, and act beneficially in the
same manner as leeches. At the same time, purgative medicines should
be freely administered.

In some irritable constitutions, even all the remedies which I have
named will not be successful, the pain and inflammation still continu-
ing : and you are under the necessity of having recourse to opium — the
best form in which it can be given is that of the compound ipecacuanha
powder. I prescribe ten grains of this, and two grains of calomel, to be
taken at night; sometimes I order them night and morning. Dover’s
powder and calomel thus combined, without exception form the best



WASTING OF THE TESTES.



477



remedy that I am acquainted with, for subduing irritable inflammation ;
and after the operation of purgatives, you will find them of infinite
service.

Well, it sometimes happens that, notwithstanding all we can do,
abscesses in the testicle will form : we must then apply poultices and
fomentations, for the purpose of bringing them to a speedy issue.
After the discharge of the matter, should any sinuses remain, you must
inject with a solution of sulphate of copper, in the proportion of two
grains to an ounce of water ; diluted sulphuric acid is occasionally
used, but I give the preference to the former. The reason that there is
so much difficulty in getting these sinuses to heal, is that the semen is
a fluid which is constantly secreting day and night, consequently the
adhesive inflammation is interrupted in its progress.

From these sinuses

FUNGI

frequently sprout out. The treatment consists in paring them off at
their roots, and then bringing the edges of the external wound in con-
tact. These fungi are not of a malignant nature ; they resemble those
that occasionally shoot from the brain.

Well, a few words more, and then I will conclude.

WASTING OF THE TESTES.

This sometimes takes place, and is produced by two causes, absorp-
tion and ulceration. Here (showing a preparation) is an example of
this : when this effect is produced, it is generally in lads from fourteen
to seventeen years of age. It is a curious circumstance, that if a boy
of fifteen or sixteen gets a gonorrhoea, that it is often succeeded by a
wasting of one or both testicles. This effect is not the result of go-
norrhoea only ; but any cause producing inflammation of the testis, in
very young persons, will now and then lead to a similar misfortune. I
have known it happen in consequence of blows from cricket bats and
balls. The only

Treatment likely to prevent their entire decay, is probably to employ
them, to render them active, before the whole of the glandular structure
has become destroyed. If, however, the inflammation of the testicle
has been severe, that alone is sufficient to derange the glandular struc-
ture in very young persons. I have known both testicles waste from
the formation of scrofulous abscesses. Such cases are truly deplorable.



478



ON SYMPATHETIC BUBO.



LECTURE LX.

\ ,

Gentlemen, having at a former time treated of chronic enlargement
of the testicle, and irritable testicle, I shall proceed this evening to
consider sympathetic bubo.

SYMPATHETIC BUBO

is usually the result of inflammation of the glands of the penis. The
inflammation extends on the outward surface of the glands, the absor-
bents of the dorsum of the penis become enlarged, and. if you rub your
finger along the dorsum, you feel them hardened like a knot or cord,
and frequently connected with the glands near the pubes. A bubo of
this kind rarely suppurates; now and then you will meet with one that
suppurates, but only in very irritable constitutions. When the inflam-
mation extends from the penis to the glands of the groin, these become
inflamed also, and enlarged ; and it is not at all surprising for a
swelling, after a gonorrhoea, to come on in the groin ; a patient under
such circumstances is afraid of a bubo, and alarm is excited in his mind
of its being syphilitic; you may however, calm his fears, and tell him
that it is a common concomitant of gonorrhoea, and that he need not
be uneasy.

The distinction between a sympathetic bubo, and one from syphilis,
consists in this circumstance: — in general, one gland only is enlarged
in syphilis; but in a sympathetic bubo you most frequently find a
chain of glands affected. In the groin there are two sets of glands ;
one just above Poupart’s ligament, and the other about two inches or
an inch and a half below it : the lower tier is seldom enlarged from
sympathy, the upper frequently. Whether the gland will suppurate or
not, depends greatly on the mode of treatment : if mercury be given,
it will be hurried into a suppurative process, therefore it should not be
used so as to produce a mercurial action in the system ; connected with
aperients, it is proper. The plan of treatment in sympathetic bubo is
the same as that for inflammation in any other part of the body ; you
purge the patient, apply leeches and an evaporating lotion, and advise
him to diminish his quantity of exercise. By this plan it soon gives
way, and it is his own fault if it suppurates.

The glans penis is covered with a plexus of absorbents, and, by
making a small puncture in the skin of the dead subject, and intro-
ducing some quicksilver under it, those of the dorsum receive the mer-
cury, and by this means you inject the glands of the groin. Irritation
by sympathy, or from the venereal virus, extends in this direction.



ON SYMPATHETIC BUBO AND GLEET. 4J9

The plexus on the glans becomes inflamed, the absorbents on the
dorsum irritated, and then the glands of the groin enlarged; they are
enlarged by a continued sympathy, rather than the sympathy by which
one part becomes affected by another at a distance from it ; it is by a
continuation of the inflammation, which commences at the mouth of
the absorbents, and terminates in the gland.

GLEET.

The disease of which I shall now proceed to speak is protracted, and
difficult to cure ; but first I have a few words to say on the nature of
gleet. Gleet is said to be that stage of gonorrhoea when the discharge
ceases to be infectious. I doubt whether there is such a complaint as
gleet, according to this definition, for I cannot help believing that a
gonorrhoea never ceases to / be infectious. Gonorrhoea, when neglected,
sinks into a gleet, and is known by the change of the colour of the
discharge, and the pain attending the inflammatory stage ceasing. In
this state, is the discharge infectious or not ? I doubt myself whether
a gonorrhoia ever loses its power of causing infection as long as any
discharge from the urethra remains ; and I will give you my reasons
for this opinion. A married gentleman went to Lisbon from this
country, and whilst at a distance from home, departed, as too many do,
from the path of virtue, and went astray. The Portuguese lady with
whom he cohabited, took care to give him a clap, that he might not
forget her. He returned to England, and, at the expiration of five
months and three days after first observing the gonorrhoea, he called on
me, and asked whether he might return home with safety to his wife ?
he said that he had a little discharge, and wished to know if, after
having had it five months and three days, it were possible for it to be
infectious ? I replied, “ Certainly not, you may go home, there is no
danger of your giving it to your wife.” He went home and unfortu-
nately gave his wife a severe clap. I attended both the parties after-
wards, and was extremely sorry for what I had done ; but I thought at
the time I gave the advice, that a gleet was not infectious. But I think
differently now, and believe that, after a continuance of several months,
the discharge is infectious. A gentleman from the north of England,
and who had been recently married, came to me, and said that he had
communicated a gonorrhoea to his wife. Shocked at such an occurrence,
1 said, “ How could you think of acting in such a manner ?” “ Why,
sir, for fourteen months prior to my marriage, I had a gonorrhcea ; I
made various attempts to get rid of it, and had a variety of advice
about it, but a yellow discharge always continued. I was told by every
body that it was not infectious, and not till after such repeated assu-



480 ON SYMPATHETIC BUBO AND GLEET.

ranees did I get married : the consequence, however, is, that my wife
has a severe pain in making water, and a copious discharge.” I visited
her, and found her in this state ; she was sometime under treatment
before she recovered. From what I have seen, I do hold that a medical
man is not warranted in saying that a discharge of a gleety kind is not
infectious. If the discharge is from a stricture, it does not produce in-
fection. If the discharge is from an abscess in one of the lacunae, it
may always be known by its being absent for a week or more, and then
flowing profusely, but not so in gonorrhoea : the discharge is generally
suspended for some time, in an abscess of one of the lacunae, and then
returns, which is not the case in a clap ; and the matter from an abscess
of the lacunae is not infectious, while the discharge which begins a
gonorrhoea, and terminates in a gleet, never loses its power of pro-
ducing infection. Women of the town, who frequently have a gleet on
them, would not perhaps communicate a gonorrhoea to a debauchee ;
but let a man fresh from the country have intercourse with a woman
under such circumstances, and he would immediately have a clap.

I need not tell you what gleet is. The discharge is generally trans-
parent at first, afterwards yellow, and, if there be much excitement,
green. If the excitement be very considerable, the discharge will be
tinged with blood. Gleet is rendered purulent and bloody from ex-
cesses of different kinds. In this state, if you examine the urethra after
death, you will find the following appearances : inflammation extend-
ing for two or three inches down the urethra, and if the urethra
be laid open within twenty-four hours, it will be quite florid as far as
the seat of the gleet, but pale in the other part. The discharge does not
proceed from the vesicular seminales, or Cowper’s gland, or the prostate,
but from the lacunae ; and what you hear about seminal weakness, is
nothing but folly and absurdity ; there is no truth at all in it. The
discharge commonly called gleet, proceeds from the lacuna; of urethra.
A discharge now and then comes from the vesiculae seminales, through
the urethra : when a person has a costive motion, a drop or two of mucus,
or of a ropy fluid, proceeds from the vesiculae seminales, and is quite a
different case from that called gleet ; both are different as to their seat
and origin ; one may say with certainty, from the nature of the dis-
charge, when it proceeds from the vesiculte seminales. I was attending
a gentleman once, for obstinate stricture, on whom I frequently used
the caustic bougies; one day I called on him, and he said to me,
“ Well, sir, you have produced a considerable discharge from the
urethra, and I have communicated it to my wife ; she has considerable
pain on making water, and, whilst voiding her urine, she is obliged, on
account of the violence of the pain, to grasp the bed-post. I wish you



ON SYMPATHETIC BUBO AND GLEET. 481

would speak to her.” I saw her; she had a yellow discharge, and
great pain on making water ; but a few doses of aperient medicine soon
carried it off. Now gentlemen, as to the treatment of gleet, I would
observe this — that the medical treatment consists in the exhibition of
sweet spirits of nitre, and the balsam of copaiba ; from two or three
drachms of the former, a drachm of the latter, in four ounces of cam-
phor mixture, combined with an ounce of mucilage, will form the best
mixture I know of ; a large spoonful must be taken twice or three times
a day.

R. Spirit. /Ether. Nitric. 3ij.

Balsam. Copaib. 3j.

Mistur. Camph. f iv.

Mucil. G. Acac. §j.

Fiat mistura cujus capiat cochleare magnum bis vel ter die.

If this should not succeed, you must give cantharides, together with
the Chio turpentine, made into a pill.

R- Lytt. Pulv. gr. £.

Terebinth. Chi. gr. v.

Fiat pilula ter die sumenda.

When the other fails, this is the medicine medical men usually employ.
The local treatment consists of the use of bougies and injections : no
treatment is so successful as this ; every other is inferior to it. A bougie
should be passed every other day, according to the irritability of the pa-
tient, making use of injection at the same time : there will be no danger
of stricture from this, because the bougies will prevent it : this is the
plan of treatment you will adopt. Some persons apply to the urethra
the unguentum hydrargyri nitratis ; also the unguent, hydrarg. nitric,
oxy., which should be diluted ; a scruple to an ounce may be em-
ployed, and gradually increased to a drachm. The best injection is
that with the oxymuriate of mercury — about a quarter of a grain to
three ounces of water will be quite sufficient to begin with ; it may be
increased after a time, from half a grain to an ounce. If it should not,
however, be productive of any good, in the proportion of half a grain
to an ounce of water, do not use it any stronger, for it is likely to pro-
duce considerable irritation ; in general it is an excellent injection. The
sulphates of copper and zinc, and cuprum ammoniatum, have been re-
commended ; each has had its advocates. The plan of treatment which I
have laid down, is the one I have found the most effectual myself; it
is generally certain in its effect, and always safe to employ. There are
two diseases produced from gonorrhoea, which may be called



T T



482 ON GONORRHOEAL RHEUMATISM, &.c.



G'O NO R R I I IE A L RHEUMATISM AND GONORRIIIEAL OPHTHALMIA.

The first of these affections is not an unfrequent disease. I will give
you the history of the first case I ever met with ; it made a strong im-
pression on my mind. An American gentleman came to me with a
gonorrhoea ; and after he had told his story, I smiled, and said to him
— do so and so — (particularizing the treatment), and that he would soon
be better ; but the gentleman stopped me, and said, “ not so fast, sir ;
a gonorrhoea with me is not to be made so light of, it is no trifle ; for in
a short time you will find me with inflammation in the eyes, and, in a
few days after, I shall have rheumatism in the joints. I do not say
this from the experience of one gonorrhoea only, but from that of two,
and on each occasion I was afflicted in this manner.” I begged him to
be careful to prevent any gonorrhoeal matter coming in contact with the
eye, which he said he would. Three days after this I called on him,
and he said, “ now you may observe what I told you a day or two ago
is true.” He had a green shade on, and there was ophthalmia in each
eye. I desired him to keep in a dark room, to take active aperients,
and apply leeches to the temples, in order to reduce the inflammation.
In three days more he sent for me rather earlier than usual, for a pain
in one of his knees (the left) ; it was stiff and inflamed. I ordered
some applications, and soon after the right knee became affected in a
similar manner. The ophthalmia was with great difficulty cured, and
the rheumatism continued many weeks afterwards. This case struck
me very forcibly, and I asked Mr. Cline, with whom I was in the habit
of frequently coming in contact, whether he had ever seen rheumatism
proceeding from gonorrhoea ; and he replied, several times.

The next case did not surprise me so much ; and now and then, ever
since, I have met with similar ones. It is by no means an unfrequent
occurrence for gonorrhoea to produce a rheumatic and painful affection
of the joints. Whether it is by absorption of the poison, or the constant
irritation produced by the inflammation of the urethra, I do not know ;
but certain it is, that gonorrhoea produces ophthalmia and rheumatism,
and when not a single drop of matter has been applied to the eye. The
inflammation generally attacks both eyes, and is of long duration. It
requires the same remedies as are used in gonorrhoea ; balsam of copaiba,
or some form of turpentine, will be found the best, and to these you
add such local treatment as the state of the inflammation demands.
But, with regard to gonorrhoeal rheumatism, some form of turpentine
must be exhibited; either the spirit of turpentine, the balsam copaiba,
or olibanum. 'When you have practised a little, you will find this to
l-e true. I do not recollect to have met with a description of it in any



ON GONORRHGDA IN FEMALES. 483

surgical work ; but whoever has practised at all, must have frequently
met with it.

GONOItltHCEA IN FEMALES.

Gonorrhoea in females is rather less violent than in males. Its seat is
in Cowper’s glands, on each side of the urethra, at the os externum.
On each side of the os externum there are two small openings, which
will admit the head of a probe being introduced into them, and these
are the seat of the gonorrhoea in females. There is a great degree of
surrounding inflammation : the orifice of the meatus urinarius and
lacunas discharge matter. There is pain in making water, and in
some severe cases it commonly happens that there is considerable irri-
tation of the bladder, of which the shortness of the urethra is the cause ;
the inflammation at the orifice extends down the meatus urinarius,
to the internal coat of the bladder. In this complaint, the meatus
urinarius, Cowper’s glands, and the extremity of the vagina, are red,
and the carunculse mytiformes swollen. I once had an opportunity of
examining a woman from Magdalen ward of this hospital, who died of
gonorrhoea ; it is the only female with this complaint I have ever
opened. In addition to the circumstances I have just mentioned, I
found the urethra very red, and red streaks proceeding from the termi-
nation of the meatus urinarius to the bladder, and the bladder itself
inflamed.

There is a circumstance which I am exceedingly anxious to dwell
on — I allude to a discharge from young females ; and I hope that there
is not one here this evening but will be strongly impressed with the
importance of the subject. Children from one year old, and even under,
up to the age of puberty, are frequently the subject of a purulent dis-
charge from the pudendum, chiefly originating beneath the preputium
clitoridis; the nymphte, orifice of the vagina, and the meatus urinarius,
are in an inflamed state, and pour out a discharge. The bed linen and
rest of the clothes are marked by it. It now and then happens to a ner-
vous woman, to be alarmed at such an appearance, and she suspects her
child of having acted in an improper manner ; and perhaps, not quite
clear herself, she is more ready to suspect others, and says, dear me, (if
she confesses), it is something like what I have had myself. She goes
to a medical man, who may unfortunately not be aware of the nature
of the complaint I am speaking of, and he says, “ Good God, your
child has got the clap.” (A lauyh). A mistake of this kind, gentle-
men, is no laughing matter ; and though I am glad to make you
smile sometimes, and like to join you in your smiles, I cannot do it on
the present occasion, for it is too serious a matter. I can assure you
a multitude of persons have been hanged by such a mistake. I will



484



ON GONORRIKEA IN FEMALES.



tell you exactly what takes place in such cases : the mother goes home,
and says to the child, “ Who is it that has been playing with you ?
■who has taken you on his knee lately ?” The child innocently replies,
“ No one, mother ; nobody has, I declare to you.” The mother then
says, “ Oh, don’t tell me such stories ; I will flog you, if you do.” And
thus the child is driven to confess what never happened, in order to
save herself from being chastised. At last she says, “ Such a one has
taken me on his lap.” The person is questioned, and firmly denies it ;
but the child, owing to the mother’s threats, persists in what she has
said. The man is brought into a Court of Justice ; a surgeon, who is
ignorant of the nature of the discharge I am now speaking about, gives
his evidence, and the man suffers for that which he never committed.
The mother is persuaded, if there be a slight ulceration on the parts,
that violence has been used, and a rape committed ; she immediately
says, “ What a horrid villain must he be for forcing a child to such an
unnatural crime, and communicating to her such a horrible disease ! I
should be glad to see him hanged.”

If I were to tell you how often I have met with such cases, I should
say that I have met with thirty in the course of my life. The last case
I saw was in the city : a gentleman came to me, and asked me to see
a child with him, who had a gonorrhoea on her. I went, and found
that she had a free discharge from the preputium clitoridis. I said that
there was nothing so common as this. There was considerable inflam-
mation, and it had even proceeded to ulceration, which I told him would
soon give way to the use of the liquor calcis with calomel. “ Do you
tell me so? (he replied), why, suspicion has fallen on one of the ser-
vants ; but he will not confess. If he had appeared at the Old Bailey,
I should have given my evidence against him ; for I was not aware of
what you have just now told me.” 1 told him that, if the man had
been hanged by this evidence, he would have deserved to be hanged
too.

I am anxious that this complaint should be known by every one pre-
sent, and that the remarks 1 have made should be circulated throughout
the kingdom. When a child has this discharge, there is a heat of the
parts, slight inflammation, and this sometimes increases, and goes on
to ulceration. This disease sometimes occurs in children at the time of
cutting their teeth. The treatment you adopt is the lime-water, with
calomel, applied to the part ; and give calomel and rhubarb, com-
bined with jalap.

As to the treatment of gonorrhoea in females, you must direct the
patient to take diluents : we possess no medicine which has a specific
influence over the discharge in females ; you must depend on diluents,



ON CHANCRE.



485



and appease any local inflammation by the use of such lotions as the
liquor, plumbi subacetatis, dilutus ; a sponge dipped in these should
be introduced into the vagina, and be allowed to remain there : it
should, however, be often removed and cleansed. It is necessary that
the patient should take aperient medicines.

OF GLEET IN FEMALES.

I observed, when speaking of gleet in males, that it was doubtful
whether the discharge, as long as it continued, ever ceased to he infec-
■ tious. The same observation applies to females. The learned professor
here related the experiment detailed by Mr. Hunter, in his work on
Syphilis, shewing the length of time the infection may be propagated
by a female, after the appearance of the discharge.

LECTURE LXI.

CHANCRE.

There are two poisons, as I mentioned to you before, communicated
by venereal intercourse ; one the poison of gonorrhoea, which, falling on
a mucous surface, produces from that surface a discharge of matter
which is infectious ; the other, the poison of syphilis, which, applied to
the skin, or, as far as is known at present, to any surface, produces in-
flammation and ulceration, forming a sore called chancre ; which, being

( received into the glands of the groin, occasions bubo, and being conveyed
into the system, circulates with the blood, produces ulceration on dif-
ferent parts of the body, on the mucous membrane of the throat, the
skin, the periosteum and bones.

| The time at which the effect of the poison that produces chancre

makes its appearance is uncertain ; the chancre, however, generally ap-
pears three or four days after connexion, and from four to seven days
is the average time. The poison first produces inflammation, then
ulceration ; the inflammation is attended by a pimple arising from the
surface affected, which is like a common pimple, excepting that it is of
a deeper colour ; instead of being quite florid, it is of a darker hue.
The pimple is surrounded by a kind of erysipelatous inflammation ; an
ulcer forms in the centre, and then a pit forms in the body of the sore,
which is often of considerable magnitude, and extends beneath the skin.
The surrounding edges of the sore are hard and ragged, its surface is
yellow, and the margin red ; and if you were asked if a sore was a
chancre or not, you would answer, I must feel it first, and not decide
merely by looking at it. You would then lift up the part between your

T T 2



486



ON CHANCRE.



fingers ; and, if you found a hardness beneath, this would be a very
goodcriterion of its being a syphilitic sore ; for it is neither in the ulcera-
tion, nor in the yellowness of the surface, nor the raggedness of the
edges, but in the colour and hardness of the sore, that the characteristic
marks of the chancre manifest themselves ; from the presence of these,
you form an opinion, and are enabled to say positively if the sore be a
chancre. But gentlemen, if you ask me whether it is possible to de-
termine that a sore on the penis is not chancre, I should tell you, that
I believe it impossible for any man positively to say that it is not ;
chancre varies exceedingly in its appearance in different persons, also
in the same person under different degrees of irritation, and as it is
accompanied by more or less of inflammation ; and every one who has
seen any thing of practice in his profession must know, that secondary
symptoms occasionally appear after sores, which, at the time he was led
to suppose were not syphilitic. I could say hi an instant when a sore
had a syphilitic action ; but still a sore may not have the character of
syphilis, and yet be so.

We shall now trace the varieties of chancre, and the causes which
more frequently produce them. The first circumstance which gives rise
to variety in the appearance of chancre is — 1st. When the chancre is
produced by the application of the venereal virus to a surface that is
broken. Now, if the poison be applied to a sore, or an excoriation, it
produces ultimately a syphilitic action, as is witnessed afterwards in
bubo and secondary symptoms ; but it is a long time before the vene-
real action is excited, and, in these cases, you will find that the sore has
neither a surrounding hardness, nor a livid colour. When chancre is
produced by the application of the virus to an excoriation or tear, you
must be contented to judge of its character from other circumstances ;
it may have the appearance of being syphilitic, but you must hesitate
before you give a positive opinion — it requires time to decide it, and
you may say to the patient, that there is considerable doubt as to the
nature of the sore ; it may be simply an excoriation, or, on the other
hand, it may be a syphilitic sore : your best plan is merely to apply
simple applications to the part, and wait, if it be syphilis, till secondary
symptoms appear, when you must have recourse to mercury for the treat-
ment of the complaint. This is one of the varieties caused by the appli-
cation of the venereal poison to an excoriation or tear, preventing you
from forming an accurate judgment on the first appearance of the sore. I
tell you what I generally inquire of patients under these circumstances,
viz. whether they observed the sore on the following day after connec-
tion. If they say “ Yes,” the probability is, that it is not syphilitic,
but it is no infallible criterion ; therefore treat the sore as you would






ON CHANCRE.



487



any other, by common means at first, and wait the issue, to see whether
it is venereal or not. Another circumstance, producing a variety in the
appearance, is its seat. Chancre situated on the fr amun.is differentto
what lias been described attacking the other parts; it generally happens
that a chancre in this situation rapidly destroys the part, unless mer-
cury be given early ; it is more irregular in its appearance than chancres
in other parts, and does not assume a character similar to those seated
on the glans. It’ it happens to be on the edge of the prepuce, a good
deal of effusion into the cellular membrane takes place, and phymosis
is produced ; when the sore is situated just where the skin doubles over
the penis, it is exceedingly troublesome — there is considerable swelling,
also a difficulty in drawing back the skin ; in this situation it seldom
fails to produce phymosis, from what cause it is scarcely necessary to
explain to you — the inflammation leads to an effusion into the cellular
tissue, and the result is phymosis. If the chancre be on the corona
glandis, or between it and the fraenum, you often find it extending deep,
producing sloughing of the part, and even of the glans itself, which is not
at all an uncommon result of deep-seated chancre at the corona glandis.

The next circumstance which gives rise to a variety in the appear-
ance, is when it ulcerates deeply into the cellular tissue : a chancre on
the surface of the skin is very slightly irritable ; but, if it passes the
skin, and extends into the cellular tissue, it assumes a disposition to
ulcerate and slough. A chancre on the skin heals under the use of medi-
cines and external applications; but, if once it enters beneath the skin,
and inflames the cellular tissue, it becomes irritable, sloughs, and is
attended with danger ; the danger arising when the chancre extends
beneath the part on which it began. When the chancre is on the sur-
face of the skin, and does not produce deep ulceration, it is a disease
slow in its progress, and easy of cure ; but if, on the other hand, it
extends deeply into the part, it proceeds with rapidity, and those
acquainted with the disease dread it, knowing the extent of sloughing
which will be produced. But, gentlemen, of all the causes of varieties
of chancre, one of the most common, is the habit and constitution of
the patient. If each of you (which God forbid !) had a chancre this
evening, and you all used the same applications, in four or five days,
scarcely two of you would have the chancre of the same appearance. Go
into the admission rooms of these hospitals on taking-in days, and you
will not see two men with chancres alike. The variety is not only pro-
duced by the previous mode of living, and the constitution of the
patient, but any act of intemperance, excess of any kind, or any thing
that hurries the circulation, will alter the action of the part. So, if two
patients be attacked with chancre, the one not of an irritable habit, and



488



ON CHANCRE.



the other being vevy irritable, you will find in the first that there would
be scarcely any inflammation, whilst in the second it would be violent,
and of an erysipelatous character ; indeed, under these circumstances,
if the part be not very carefully managed, it will be in considerable
danger. So a man with a chancre to-day, which has a healthy appear-
ance, shall to-night indulge in some act of debauchery, to-morrow he
will have a bloody discharge from the sore, inflammation round the
edges, and an irritable state of the parts, which you will soon find
assuming a sloughing disposition. Thus, then, if the constitution be
irritable naturally, from intemperate habits, or inattention to rest, the
most serious state of chancre may arise. People pursuiug a particular
business, such as journeymen bakers, whose habits are of the most irre-
gular kind, are frequently affected with chancres going into the slough-
ing process. See, for instance, how these people pass their lives,
kneading dough during the greater part of the night, lying down only
during short intervals to rest, frequently staying up all the night with-
out any repose ; and if they rest at all, only for a few hours towards
morning, and thus rendering their constitutions excessively irritable.
When the chancre proceeds to a sloughing state, from any of the causes
I have mentioned, the pulse will be generally from 120 to 130; you
will also find a considerable erysipelatous inflammation extending round
the chancre ; and, in a short time, the sloughing process commences,
by which the penis is lost. These varieties of chancre you have an
opportunity every week of seeing for yourselves ; and if you have not
observed them, it shows a shameful neglect of your duty. The time
at which chancre appears after connexion is from four to seven days ;
but if there is a gonorrhoea also, it prevents the appearance of the
chancre so early : thus, if a person be affected with the two poisons,
the one delays the appearance of the other. If the matter of a chancre
be applied to the urethra, it will not produce a gonorrhoeal discharge,
but a sore, and that sore will pour out a serous fluid, mixed with the
red particles of blood, not at all purulent, but of a bloody serum, which
is the matter from the chancre, and not in any respect gonorrhoeal. The
matter of gonorrhoea does not produce chancre; for, if leeches be applied
to the prepuce, and the gonorrhoeal matter afterwards comes in contact
with the leech-bites, a sore is produced, not of a chancreous character,
and it heals by common means. The poison of chancre will not produce
a gonorrhoea, nor the poison of goliorrhcea induce a chancre.

Having thus endeavoured to explain the character of chancre, I shall
now speak of the treatment it requires ; and here let me remind you,
that I shall deliver no speculative opinions, nothing but what you may
see every day exemplified in practice. The first point to be considered



ON CHANCRE.



489



respecting the cure of chancre is, shall caustic be applied to it or not ?
He who uses caustic to chancres pursues a line of practice liable to be
productive of much mischief. 1st. Because the application irritates the
part, and may in consequence, produce bubo. 2d. If the action of the
sore be altered by it, it will not prevent the constitution from being
affected, because if there be any ulceration, the process of absorption
must have commenced, and the poison applied to the part will be taken
into the constitution. 1 would ask the person who uses caustic for the
cure of chancres, how is chancres produced ? We know that there can be
no sore without the ulcerative or absorbent process ; and the chancreous
matter applied to a part, causing a sore in that part, must be absorbed
and taken into the system. Caustic to chancres is a very objectionable
application ; but it is the acme of folly to endeavour to cur ea patient
by means of it, without adopting a proper mercurial treatment, to coun-
teract the constitutional effects that will otherwise be produced by the
absorption of the venereal virus. A young person with whom I was
intimate whilst I lived with my old master, got a chancre, which, to use
his expression, he burned out by application of caustic : I laughed at
him for being so foolish ; the caustic produced a slough, but cured the
chancre, and I thought nothing more of the circumstance. Some time
afterwards I visited him in the country, and I asked him how he was ?
“ Very well now,” he replied, “ but I have been in a fine scrape ; I
was engaged, when I left town, to a young lady, the nuptials were to
have been soon celebrated, and the business of life commenced.” I
involuntarily smiled, but he said, “ Not quite so merry : when I got
into the country, I had what I conceived at the time was only a huski-
ness of the throat, which I had caught from a cold. My throat becom-
ing more painful, I looked into the glass, and perceived that I had a
large sore on the tonsils, decidedly syphilitic. Vou may conceive how
I felt : I wrote to the lady that I was unwell, who, exceedingly hurt at
such news, came and nursed me whilst I underwent a course of mercu-
rial treatment (she being perfectly unconscious of the cause of my com-
plaint), by which means I was quite restored, when the marriage cere-
mony was celebrated.” It was just a proper punishment for his folly.
The application of caustic to a chancre does not render a person safe
from its effects, for, if the sore be a chancre, the syphilitic virus must
have been admitted into the constitution. I will tell you what
treatment you should pursue : as soon as a patient applies to you for
this complaint, you should ask him if he wishes to be properly cured at
once, by a simple mercurial treatment, or have the chancre cured
without it, and run the risk of having secondary symptoms occurring at
a future period. His answer will be, “ for God’s sake, give me what



490



ON CHANCRE.



is proper now for my cure, without submitting me to the chance of being
laid up a second time with this complaint and you then order him
to take five grains of blue pill, and a quarter of grain of opium, night
and morning ; if you exceed this quantity, let him take an additional
pill at bed-time. Now, gentlemen, this medicine, continued for three
weeks, will be quite sufficient for the cure of the disease. It may be
asked, why do you combine opium with the mercury ? If you were
not to do it, the result would be, that the mercury by itself would
irritate the chancre, but, if the mercury be combined with opium, it
rarely produces this effect ; the way, therefore, to prevent irritation and
a sloughing state of the chancre, is to give the mercury in conjunction
with opium. The patient will ask you how he should live whilst he is
undergoing this treatment ? you may tell him that he may follow his
business or occupation just the same as before, that he should not take
any species of food which is likely to disorder his bowels, as it is
desirable to prevent the mercury acting on the intestinal canal ; but his
mode of living should be as usual — he should avoid acids, because they
would purge him, and for this reason he should not take vegetables,
which contain much acescent matter ; there is no necessity for him to
change his food. Two or three glasses of wine a-day would not prevent
the action of the mercury — taken so as to hurry the circulation, will
oppose it; but, if taken moderately, it will do no harm. With respect
to the quantity of mercury given, the treatment of the syphilitic disease
is greatly improved, for all that you want is just to keep up the mer-
curial action on the constitution for a short time, instead of making the
patient spit at the mouth, for weeks and months, as used to be done.
One point has also been ascertained, that chancres for which no mercury
has been taken, are not always followed by secondary symptoms. With
the exception that lesser quantities of mercury are given, I should say
that, within the last twenty-five years, the treatment of the venereal i
disease has gone back rather than improved. Secondary symptoms now 1
are more frequently met with than formerly, owing to the neglect of a !
mercurial treatment on the first appearance of the complaint. A person
hardly knows now when he is cured : a half practice has been substi-
tuted for one that was perfectly efficient : and the result is that, at
present, a person is scarcely ever properly cured. Day after day we
see persons with pains in their limbs, sores on their body, and affections
of the throat, and do not know whether they are syphilitic or not. You
ask the patient if he has had chancres ; he says “ No.” “ Have you
had no sore or excoriation ?” you then inquire ; when he will often tell
you, “ Yes, I had several excoriations;” and thus, you do not know
whether the eruption is syphilitic or not: but more of this when speak- !



ON PHYMOSIS.



491



ing of the use and abuse of mercury. The local application I make use
of, is the liquor calcis with calomel, and I will tell you why I always
make use of local means. The local application lessens the irritation
of the sore, and prevents its attacking the neighbouring parts. If any
of you had chancre, in addition to the local means, you would, if the sore
healed, continue taking medicines do not think, because the sore is
healed, that you would stop the mercury : no, it must be continued
during the time I have mentioned before, to prevent the recurrence of
secondary symptoms ; it will be proper to heal the sore as quickly as
you can, but you must protect the constitution against the effects of the
venereal virus, by mercurial treatment : this is the best possible treat-
ment. and which you will pursue if you deal honestly with your patient.
If you wish to see the effect of any new project, or try any experiment,
this is all well, but you should try them on yourselves. If patients,
however, come to you for advice, they place themselves under your care,
and confide in your skill ; therefore, it is the duty of every surgeon to
adopt the most certain and effectual means for their relief. With respect
to local applications, I think the sulphate of copper too irritating; sub-
muriate of mercury sprinkled on the sore, is sometimes beneficial, but it
is generally too irritating also. The unguentum hydrargyri nitrico-
oxydo, I have seen of considerable use after a time ; but it should not be
applied at the beginning of the complaint. The unguentum hydrargyri
is a bad application; it is too irritating. Sometimes it appears that the
chancre goes into an indolent state, then it will be advisable to use the
nitTate of silver, not with a view to destroy the part, but for the purpose
of cleaning the surface, and thickening the edges of the wound ; the
skin surrounding the part is thin, and by the application of the nitrate
of silver you thicken it, and thus enable it to carry a greater number of
vessels to produce cicatrization.

PHYMOSIS.

It not unfrequently happens, that phymosis is the result of chancre.
1 1 is hardly necessary for me to say what phymosis is ; it sometimes
arises from slight inflammation of the cellular tissue, and effusion of
serous matter into it. Here I will observe, that, should you find, during
a mercurial treatment, considerable inflammation produced round the
chancre, lay aside the use of mercury.

The great secret, in the treatment of this disease, is knowing when to
discontinue the use of mercury ; you should always suspend it when
the inflammation is increased during its employment, for if you per-
severe in the use of mercury, you will only add to the irritation, which
will end in the sloughing process, and destruction of the part. If I were



492



ON PHYMOSIS.



to give to a patient mercury for chancre on the Saturday, and on the
Monday following I perceived swelling and inflammation round the
sore, 1 should immediately lay aside the mercury, give active purges,
order poppy fomentations, and the parts to be suspended. The black
wash should be applied to the sore, injecting it under the skin, unless
it should increase the irritability of the part. After the purges, ad-
minister opium in considerable quantities, and when you have reduced
the inflammation, have recourse to the mercury again ; but, if you had
gone on with this medicine in the irritable state of the part, the result
would be sloughing of the penis. When there is phymosis, together with
sloughing of the penis, stop the mercury, order the patient the recum-
bent posture, and the part to be well supported ; use fomentations and
poultices of a slightly stimulating kind; you support a gently stimu-
lating action in order to produce a sectretion sufficient to support the
powers of the part; if you stimulate it too much, the part will be
destroyed, and if you omit to do it in a slight degree, there will be no
separation of the slough. The poultices we generally employ are made
with stale beer-grounds ; carrot poultices is stimulating to the part ;
this poultice stimulates rather too much, unless the carrots have been
boiled for a long time. The medicines we give are musk and ammonia,
five grains of the ammonia with ten of musk, two or three times a-day.
The nitric acid lotion is a common application used in these hospitals,
and we find none produce so much good ; the proportions are about
forty drops of undiluted acid, to a quart of water. When phymosis
remains after the inflammatory state has passed away, it will be neces-
sary to perform an operation for its cure. The operation is exceedingly
simple, it consists in introducing a director beneath the skin, along the
glans, till it reaches the corona glandis ; this is the extent to which it
should be introduced, so that the point should rest against the inside of
the prepuce ; this being done, a sharp-pointed bistoury is to be passed
along the director to its extremity, then pushed through the skin oppo-
site to the corona glandis, and drawn out. But when you have done
this, you will find that the internal part of the prepuce is not divided
as much as the external, which you are obliged to divide a second time.
The next thing you do, is to apply a piece of lint round the prepuce,
which is to be supported on the penis by tape ; the roller should be
applied, so as to make gentle pressure, for the purpose of preventing a
secretion from the blood-vessels. You let the patient remain as long
as he can without making water, in order not to disturb the dressings.
When you see him on the following day, you soak the penis in warm
water, remove the lint, and draw the prepuce gently over the glans.
This you should do daily, taking care that the edges of the divided



ON PARAPH YMOSI8.



493






surfaces do not unite. When the part is quite healed, a small aperture
only is left in the upper part of the prepuce, which is of very trifling
importance.



LECTURE LXII.

E spoke, gentlemen, at the conclusion of the last lecture, of phymosis ;
we shall now proceed to paraphymosis.

PARAPH YMO SIS

is not an uncommon consequence of chancre. When there is tightness
ot the prepuce from inflammation, it frequently happens that, after the
skin has been pulled back, it cannot again be drawn over the penis, on
account of the skin forming a tight ligqture round the penis, just be-
hind the corona glandis, strangulating it in the same way as the intes-
tine in hernia. The object in your treatment should be to reduce the
strangulated part as quickly as possible : all other means are improper ;
the application of cold is absurd ; you merely lose time by employing
.t it is a vain and useless mode of procedure. The proper plan for
you to pursue is this ; you see the penis greatly distended with blood ;
therefore, take hold ot the glans between your fingers, and endeavour
to empty the vessels by means of gentle pressure. W hen you have
done this for a few minutes, you endeavour to reduce it by pushing the
glans back, and, at the same time, taking hold of the skin of the penis,
and drawing it forwards. By this plan you will generally succeed, if
) ou see the case a short time after it has happened ; but if the paraphy-
mosis has existed for some days, it will be wrong to attempt reduction
by pressure on the glans. You should then divide the strictured part
with a bistoury. This you do by separating the skin on each side as
much as you can from the stricture ; you then insert a director under
it, and with a sharp-pointed bistoury divide the stricture, which will
allow the skin readily to be drawn over the penis. After the paraphy-
mosis has been reduced, poultices must be applied to the part. It is
etimes necessary to remove a portion of the prepuce by circumcision :

CS . ° f P h y mosis > where the prepuce is naturally long, and only a
tvision of the skin is required to allow it being drawn back, this
operation is preferable to the one which I before described.

aving spoken of the common consequences of chancre, I shall now
treat of the

IRRITABLE AND SI.OUOIIINO CHANCRE.

Every now and then a chancre becomes irritable, from causes already
pointet out. Directly you see a chancre assume an irritable character,

u u



494



ON IRRITABLE CHANCRE.



desist from the use of mercury. To know when to stop the mercury,
is the great secret in the treatment of the venereal disease. It is in con-
sequence of mercury being given in this state to the patient, that it does
so much harm, producing those sloughing chancres that not unfrequently
destroy life. Thus, when a sore becomes irritable under the use of
mercury, and the inflammation extends, lay it aside, and have recourse
to simple applications, such as poppy fomentations and poultices, to
lessen the irritation. After you have purged the patient, give opium
combined with saline mixture ; as good a medicine as you can employ,
under these circumstances, is the liquor, ammonia? acetatis. In this
way you will dimish the irritation ; and when the surrounding inflam-
mation is got rid of, return to the mercury, taking care to discontinue
it if the irritability should return. Some advise the compounddecoction
of sarsaparilla, and I believe that it has the power of diminishing, to
a considerable degree, that irritability of constitution from which many
persons suffer during an attack of syphilis ; with this view, give it by
all means ; but as to its curing syphilis, 1 do not believe a word of it.
You may suspend the syphilitic symptoms for a time, but they will
soon ve-appear ; and a person who trusts to this alone will be a martyr
to a disease which might have been easily cured. But more of this
when making some general remarks on syphilis. If a person with irri-
table chancre is guilty of intemperance, addicts himself to any excess,
or is careless of his health, the sore will slough, and often end in the
destruction of the penis. Do not think that it is a rare occurrence for
the penis to be destroyed by mercury : no ; a chancre that has remained
weeks in a healthy state shall become irritable, and, by maltreatment, by
the injudicious and improper use of mercury, shall slough, and end in
the destruction of the penis ; this is not a rare case, and it is attri-
buted to the venereal disease, but in reality is an effect of the injudi-
cious use of mercury. This is a true history of the case. When you
see a sore take on the sloughing appearance, the treatment must be
changed, the employment of mercury suspended ; what you do, is
gently to stimulate the part by the nitric acid lotion ; there is no better
application in this stage of the disease than this, and those who have
attended to the practice of the hospital need not be told of this by me.
From thirty to fifty drops of acid, in a quart of water, is the proportion
in which you should use it; fomentations and poultices may sometimes
be employed, but in general they are not good, as they soften and weaken
the parts rather too much ; they are not sufficiently stimulating. IV arm
spirits of turpentine may sometimes be employed with benefit. You
will be obliged to have recourse to a great number of applications,
and frequently to change them, before any relief can be obtained.



ON IRRITABLE CHANCRE.



495



Most of you recollect a girl over in the other hospital, in Lydia’s
ward, who had sloughing of the pudendum ; seventeen or eighteen
different applications were employed, but the same application sel-
dom agreed with the sore for five days in succession — it was obliged
to be changed, and some other used ; the girl, however, ultimately
recovered. When the patient is very irritable, opium, and the com-
pound decoction of sarsaparilla should be exhibited ; in this way
you diminish the irritability of the part. When the sloughing ex-
tends, the ammonia combined with opium will be found of consider-
able benefit ; five grains of ammonia and one grain of opium, three
times a-day. We are in the habit of giving in these hospitals ammonia
and musk, ten grains of musk and five of ammonia, three times a-day,
in the form of a bolus ; and, on the whole, we find that they exercise
a considerable influence in sloughing chancre. At the same time you
must support the patient’s strength by a nutritious diet, and give stimu-
lants to assist the digestive powers, and the power of the circulation ;
wine and porter must be allowed ; porter, if the patient is of an irritable
constitution, and wine if he is not ; they must be given so as to keep
up a vigorous action, but not to excite a feverish heat.

By these means you will generally put a stop to the sloughing, and
establish the patient’s health. If the chancre slough early, you should
not make use of mercury immediately after the healing process has
taken place, but wait for the secondary symptoms. If the sloughing
comes on early, the patient is often safe from future attacks, and I
therefore generally wait to see the result. It occasionally happens that
an opening in the urethra is formed to a considerable extent ; when
there is an opening there are three plans of treatment to be adopted :
— 1st. If the opening is small, a bougie should be passed till there is
established a considerable diameter of the urethra, just anterior to the
opening, to allow the water to pass freely, when the aperture will soon
Close. 2dly. If the opening is large, a caustic should be applied round
the edges of the aperture, a little nitric acid will do, which produces a
slough of the cuticle and cutis ; when the healing process commences,
it should be continued once a-week till a cicatrix forms, and draws the
parts together, and entirely cures the patient. 3dly. The next mode
adopted is, the Taliacotian operation : it consists in bringing a piece of
the living skin over the aperture. Some pare the edges of the opening,
and apply the twisted suture, but it never succeeds, as the urine soon
bursts it open ; but the other operation has been performed with suecess.
I had a patient once with this complaint, in whom I separated a small
piece of skin from the scrotum, and applied its raw surface to the edges
of the wound ; this I kept in its situation by three sutures. Adhesive



496



ON CHANCRES IN WOMEN.



plaster was put over the whole, and a gum elastic catheter kept in the
urethra. This case completely succeeded. Mr. Earle has since per-
formed an operation on a similar principle and with perfect success.
I think it an operation which you ought to perform ; it may be done in
any part of the urethra.

These are the modes of treatment in the sloughing urethra. If there
is at the mouth of the urethra a cicatrix at all, or the orifice is small,
you cannot cure such a stricture in the usual mode. You must cutoff
a piece of bougie, and regularly wear it in the urethra, withdrawing it
twice or three times in the course of the day, to allow the urine to pass
off. The object is to excite a suppurative inflammation, and thus re-
move the stricture ; for when the suppurative inflammation has been
excited, the urethra has not the same disposition to contract as before.
Sometimes the extremity of the urethra is closed ; after making water
in a stream about the size of a bristle, the opening suddenly closes, and
the patient cannot make a drop. If called to such a case, what you do
is not to open the bladder, but you put the point of a lancet into the
glans, just at the commencement of the urethra, the urine gushes out
by the side of the lancet, and then a bougie requires to be worn to keep
the orifice open. Such is the treatment of obstruction of the urethra
at its orifice.

CHANCH.ES IN WOMEN.

Chancres in women are often worse than in men : they attack the
external labia, not unfrequently the inside of the nymphse, and the os
externum vaginae. Sometimes a great number of these exist at the
same time in one female, and are accompanied with but little irritation ;
she scarcely knows that she has them, till she feels the urine smart as it
touches the skin ; this engages her attention, when she perceives that
she has several pimples, which soon ulcerate. If this occur in a bad
constitution, and extend into the cellular tissue, inflammation and
sloughing of the part take place. Sometimes the labia and nymphte
slough away, and in this way it is so many lose their lives. I visited
one day the St. Giles’s workhouse, and iu a small ward belonging to
the medical establishment, I saw seven cases of sloughing chancre, and
of these seven five died. It is almost impossible for them to recover,
when there is such a destruction of parts. If you inquire into the his-
tory of the case, you find that it first began by a few pimples ; the un-
fortunate female will also tell you that she continued to walk the streets,
night after night, exposed to vicissitudes of temperature ; that she in-
dulged in the use of spirituous liquors, in order to support her declining
strength ; the disease thus occurring in a constitution destroyed by irregu-
larity of habits, the patient has but a very slight chance of recovery. If one



ON WARTS.



497



of these miserable cases could be depicted from the pulpit, as an illustra-
tion of the evil effects of a vicious and intemperate course of life, it
would, I think, strike the mind with more terror than all the preaching
in the world. The irritable state of the patient, in which the disease
occurs, leads to the destruction of life, and thus it is that such a great
number perish. If I said that I saw twenty of these cases in a year, I
should not exaggerate. Neglected chancres and injured constitutions
lead to this most frightful disease. The treatment is the same as for
males.

WARTS.

Warts were formerly considered as syphilitic, but you are to learn that
they are nothing but a local disease, requiring nothing but local means
for their cure. Yet, when I say local, I must observe that they fre-
quently secrete a matter which is able to produce a similar disease in
others. I have known two instances of this. The one occurred in a
Mr. Guller, dresser to Mr. Chandler. Mr. Chandler removed some
warts, which were of a very large size, from a patient in this hospital,
and as he was returning the knife, this gentleman put his hand forwards,
and it entered just under the thumb nail. He left town for the south-
western part of England ; in a little time, he had an irritation about the
nail, and a wart grew out from the spot where the puncture had been
made. Being in practice, this was a disagreeable circumstance ; it was
frequently destroyed, but at each time it grew again. Afterwards he
came to town, when he called on me, and told me the circumstance. I
advised him to put on a blister, for the purpose of bringing away the nail,
and, then, that the wart might be Temoved. He applied a blister, and
readily removed the nail, but it also brought away the wart, and it never
grew again. The other case of warts generating themselves was told
me by a gentleman in Sussex. He was called to attend a lady in
labour ; he felt something in the vagina, which appeared unintelligible,
and, on examination, found it to be a crop of warts. He delivered her,
but did not say any thing about the warts to the lady. In conversation
with the husband, he told him that his lady had a number of warts.
The gentleman stated that at the time he was married he had a wart on
the penis, and he had no doubt but that he communicated them to his
wife. It is a common opinion that they are propagated by the blood ;
but do not entertain this idea — it is by the secretion of matter : Simple
local irritation will produce warts. The secretion from the glandulae
odoriferte, if not cleansed, will give rise to them, or any dirt between
the penis and glands. The treatment is different, as the warts may be
hard or soft. Soft warts readily bleed, and may be easily removed : the
liquor, plumbi sub acetatis dilutus, applied to the surface of them, will

u u 2



498



ON SYPHILITIC BUBO.



remove the soft warts ; the oxymurias hydrargyri will soon destroy them.
I have used thetinctura ferri muriatis, and the black wash and calomel,
with good effect. The unguentum hydrargyri will soon destroy them,
by producing irritation, inflammation, and a sloughing of the warts.
The hard warts are more difficult to remove ; they had better be poul-
ticed first, and then touched with the unguentum arsenicale, which
should contain a drachm of the oxyde of arsenic to an ounce of lard.
A few of the warts should be touched with this application in the begin-
ning, and afterwards the whole. It produces inflammation and sloughing
of the warts. I scarcely ever use any thing else myself. Warts some-
times occur in females on the labia and nymphae, of a size you would
scarcely credit.



LECTURE LXIII.

Gentlemen, we shall proceed to speak this evening of syphilitic
bubo, and venereal sore throat.

SyPHILITIC BUBO.

The venereal poison is taken from the chancre on the penis, to the
glands of the groin ; and, in its course, usually irritates one of them.
Now and then the matter proceeds through them without producing ar.y
irritation, but more frequently it excites inflammation, and the common
effects of inflammation, if it is not opposed ; that is, if a proper treat-
ment be not pursued, the gland inflames and suppurates. It commonly
happens that only one gland is affected in either groin in syphilis; now
and then the contrary takes place ; but, in general, when several glands
are enlarged, it is from irritation, and not from the absorption of the
venereal poison. When there is only one gland enlarged, and it goes
into a suppurating state, it is usually the consequence of the stimulus
of the syphilitic virus. Therefore, you may conclude, if several glands
be enlarged, that it is not the effect of syphilis. The symptoms pro-
duced when a bubo goes into a state of suppuration, are the same as
those which take place in common abscess, with this exception, that
there are evening exacerbations ; and, in this respect, precisely the
same effect is produced as when syphilis attacks any other part of the
body, the exacerbations coming on in the afternoon, and generally last-
ing till two or three in the morning. The symptoms, then, are the same
as those of common abscess, with the exception of evening exacerba-
tions. When you are consulted about a bubo, you are led to suspect
that it is venereal, by the following circumstances : — You ask the pa-
tient if he has a sore on the penis ; if there be none, and he has never



ON SYPHILITIC BUBO. 499

had one, your opinion ought to be, that the bubo is not syphilitic.
There is no example of venereal bubo ever having occurred without a
sore. If there be no sore at the time you see the patient, you inquire
how long it is since he has had one ? If he answers, a week, a fortnight,
or even three weeks ago, still the swelling may be syphilitic : it is not
at all necessary for the sore to exist at the time the bubo appears, for
the irritation of the gland may occur a fortnight or three weeks after
the appearance of the sore. The swelling may be retarded from various
circumstances, if the patient has a diarrhoea on him, or has taken open-
ing medicine ; these, and many other causes, may delay its appearance.
The next circumstance to which you direct your attention is, whether
the enlarged gland is situated at Poupart’s ligament, or below it;
you know that there are two orders or rows of absorbent glands in the
groin. The first row is in the line of Poupart’s ligament, extending
nearly from the spinous process of the ilium to the pubis ; but below
this is another tier, situated at the distance of an inch and a half, or
two inches, from the first. If the swelling be in a line with Poupart’s
ligament, you may decide that it is a syphilitic bubo ; but you may
determine that it is not syphilitic if it be in the lower order. When you
see a swelling in the groin, about an inch and a half below Poupart’s
ligament, you inquire if there be any sore on the foot or leg, or any irri-
tation on the back or nates ; for, in such cases, the glands are generally
affected. The lower order of the glands are more frequently affected
from any irritation on the thigh and leg than on the back of the nates,
because the greater number of the absorbents from. these last parts ter-
minate in the upper row of absorbent glands. You determine that it
is not syphilitic if the swelling be in the lower row of the glands.
When you are called on to treat a syphilitic bubo, you order the patient
to take'five grains of blue pill, combined with a quarter of a grain of
opium, night and morning, with the same view as you give it in the
chancre ; the opium subdues the disposition to an irritable action being
set up in the constitution by the mercury ; and, when it is given in con-
junction with the blue pill, you seldom have those dire effects from the
syphilitic disease as when the mercury is given alone. Therefore, you
will give the blue pill combined with opium. If you find the pain in
the evening not subdued, you may give ten grains of the blue pill at
night, and five in the morning. But, at the same time that you employ
constitutional remedies, local means should not be neglected ; evapo-
rating lotions should be applied to the part, a bandage should be put
round the waist, and a linen, wetted with a lotion, composed of an ounce
of spirits of wine, to five ounces of water, should be kept to the swell-
ing, and fastened by tape to the bandage. But, gentlemen, it some-



500



ON SYPHILITIC BUBO.



times happens, notwithstanding the means you employ, the pain, swell-
ing, and the disposition of the gland to suppurate, increase ; this will
be known by sharp pains darting through the part, and a pulsating feel
in it ; for, when these occur, the suppurative process has generally
commenced ; you then apply evaporating lotion and leeches, give active
purges, and omit the blue pill, or else you will make the bubo suppu-
rate. Mercury (as you know), has the effect of hastening common in-
flammation, when it occurs in any part of the body to suppuration ;
therefore, it is wrong when any inflammatory disposition exists in the
bubo to continue the mercury, for you will most probably induce sup-
puration, when you might have prevented it. Under these circum-
stances, it is right to employ lotions and leeches, and purge the patient.
The best purges you can give are the mercurial, the submuriate of mer-
cury combined with jalap : by this plan of treatment you get rid of the
disposition to inflammation, whereas, if you continue the mercury, you
will hurry the bubo into the suppurative process. When the pain in
the part is subdued, you must return to the first treatment, which will
correct the venereal action. It may be said in opposition to this, that
you give mercury to prevent inflammation of the eye, as in irritis : this
is true, but it is not desirable, even in that complaint, to affect the
mouth to any degree; it is not that of mercurial influence which will
cure the eye, for the mercury should be suspended when the mouth be-
comes affected ; it is by increasing the secretion that the benign in-
fluence of the mercury is exercised.

It sometimes happens that the bubo attains considerable magnitude.
When this is the case you must give up the use of mercury : never con-
tinue it when the bubo is large ; it will only hurry it into a suppurative
process ; therefore, suspend the use of mercury, and endeavour to les-
sen the size of the swelling and inflammation by lotions, leeches, and
acting on the bowels, in order to promote the secretions, for this should
be your grand object in all these cases : take care, at the same time, to
give that kind of nourishment which will best support the system, without
producing an undue excitement. When a gland becomes of consider-
able size, it is usually the result of debility, and is very apt to become
chronic; you should by all means discontinue the mercury, apply
leeches, and you may gently stimulate the gland, so as to promote
absorption ; for this purpose the application of muriate of ammonia
will be of use, at the same time giving purgative medicines. But in
this enlarged state of the gland, although it begins in syphilis, mercury
greatly debilitates the constitution. When suppuration has commenced,
and the matter can be felt fluctuating, it is quite right to make an open-
ing to let it out. The opening should be small, and ought to be made



ON SYPHILITIC BUBO.



501



as soon as any pus can be felt, for absorption will begin, and the size
of the gland will soon be diminished; therefore, make an opening to
evacuate the matter as early as you can detect fluctuation. My own
opinion is, that when the suppurative process has commenced, the best
plan is to open the swelling, which I always do by puncturing it with a
lancet whenever the matter is formed ; it is of no use to let it accumu-
late, for absorption of the surrounding parts will take place, and a large
sore be formed. If the gland be opened as early as you can detect fluc-
tuation, the surrounding swelling will be lessened, the inflammation
diminished, absorption rapidly produced, and then you can return to the
mercury for effecting the cure.

It sometimes happens that the bubo is exceedingly irritable: wherever
you find it so under the use of mercury, immediately discontinue its use,
for the more mercury you give, the worse the swelling becomes : aban-
don the mercury, and have recourse to other means ; it is right in these
cases to give opium, and the compound decoction of sarsaparilla ; that
is the plan you will find the best in irritable buboes. When the state of
the swelling will allow, you can return to the use of mercury to com-
plete the cure. It is only by the injudicious use of mercury that the
very severe symptoms which occur after syphilis are produced. I do
not believe that a syphilis itself ever produces them ; no, gentlemen,
they arise either from a defect in the constitution of the patient, or from
the fault of the medical man. I do not believe that nodes arise from the
syphilitic virus alone, but principally from the injudicious treatment of
syphilis, where mercury has been incautiously administered, thereby in-
creasing the irritability of the patient, and leading to worse consequences
than the disease for which it was originally given. In order to subdue
this irritable state of constitution, give opium and the compound decoc-
tion of sarsaparilla, which will have the power of lessening the irrita-
bility of the system, and relieving the patient. As to sarsaparilla being
a specific for the cure of syphilis, you will find that it is no such thing ;
it has the power of suspending the symptoms of syphilis for a short
time, but not that of curing them ; and the surgeon who thinks that he
has, grossly deceives himself and those who are the dupes of his igno-
rance. If he fancies that the patient is cured, because the symptoms
disappear, and the patient floes not return, he equally deceives himself ;
for, if he does not return to the same surgeon (which he seldom does
when he has once been deceived by him), he goes to another, and so on,
till at last it is difficult to ascertain whether his disease is from syphilis
or from the various remedies which he has tried. What I should say
is, that the improper use of mercury leaves a disposition in the consti-
tution for the disease to return ; and whoever has seen much practice



502



ON SLOUGHING BUBO.

knows, that secondary symptoms are generally the result of a mistaken
treatment of the syphilitic disease. Well, then, opium, and the com-
pound decoction of sarsaparilla, will lessen the irritability of the consti-
tution ; and so far they are useful, but any further than this they ought
not to be used. I say, that no surgeon who understood the nature of syphi-
lis, and who had it in his own person, would trust to sarsaparilla for a
cure. In fact, I would say, if he did (and you know that I use no
milk-and-water expressions), that he was a blockhead. So long as I
have the honour of addressing you, will I openly state my opinions to
you. I am not come here to listen to the opinions of others, which I
know to be wrong from the experience of forty years’ practice, nor to
be taught by beardless boys how to treat a disease, of which I have seen
thousands and thousands of cases.

The next subject of which we shall consider is the

SLOUGHING BUBO.

If mercury be continued whilst the bubo is suppurating, as soon as
ulceration takes place the sloughing process will follow, and extend over
a considerable portion of the cellular tissue. Destruction of life in these
cases is caused in two modes. Here are two specimens (exhibiting
them to the class) taken from persons who died of sloughing bubo. In
one, the femoral artery, vein, and sartorious muscle, are laid bare to a
considerable extent. The one died from the irritation produced by the
sloughing process ; the other from hemorrhage, caused by ulceration of
the femoral artery. Thus destruction takes place from two causes,
from the extent of the sloughing process, and hemorrhage from the
opening of the femoral artery. A person with sloughing bubo died
in the hospital, about three years ago, from hemorrhage. In these
cases you generally see that there is something faulty in the constitution,
or that the patient has been injudiciously treated ; as to the treatment of
sloughing bubo, it is the same as in the sloughing chancre. Abandon-
ment of mercury, exhibition of ammonja with opium, and a generous
diet, so as to give vigour to the constitution, without exciting any febrile
action ; that is the constitutional plan of treatment which you should
employ, and the local treatment principally consists in the application
of the nitric acid wash, about fifty drops of the acid to a quart of
water. Itsometimes happens when the gland suppurates, and the slough-
ing process is going on, that secondary symptoms appear ; it is not
right to give merpury in consequence of their appearance, but you order
the patient to talfe the compound decoction of sarsaparilla. When the
sloughing process is stopped, and the wound is well, give mercury if
the secondary symptoms remain ; then, and not till then, ought you to



ON SLOUGHING BUBO.



503



attempt the cure of the disease by the exhibition of mercury. When
the sloughing process stops, and there are no secondary symptoms, do
not give mercury. It is never right to employ it as it were by specula-
tion ; it will not destroy the venereal virus, although it is not in action,
and will not prevent the appearance of the disease. Mr. Hunter was the
first who pointed this out, that syphilis could not be prevented from
appearing by the exhibition of mercury ; and most surgeons state, that
it is best not to give mercury in expectation of the appearance of the
disease, but to wait till it does appear. I give you this rather as Mr.
Hunter’s opinion than my own : there are some points connected with
this subject which I shall speak of when making some general remarks
on syphilis. It occasionally happens that, when bubo suppurates, a
sinus remains after the other part is healed. This may be often cured
by an injection of about two grains of oxymur. hydr. to an ounce of
water, or the undiluted tincture of lyttae, which will generally bring on
adhesive inflammation. If these should not succeed, you must depend
on the use of a seton, or laying the sinus open ; but this latter mode
is very rarely adopted. It sometimes happens that a gland projects
after ulceration has taken place : when a case like this occurs, when the
gland is insulated, and rises above the surrounding surface, you get rid
of it by means of small troches, made of bread and oxymuriate of mer-
cury, pointed at the extremity, which are inserted into the gland, and
allowed to remain there twenty-four hours : this generally brings on a
little inflammation, the death of the gland, and its separation from the
surrounding parts. I have known the sulphate of copper produce the
same effect, but the first is generally the best. When a number of
absorbent glands are enlarged, never consider the complaint as syphi-
litic : they are owing to a defect of the constitution, and never to syphi-
lis. After a bubo has suppurated and ulcerated, it now and then assumes
the character of what is called a phagedenic ulcer. If consulted about
the nature and treatment of this kind of ulcer, what would you say ?
First, that phagedenic bubo is an ulcer, with the edges thin, rugged,
loose, and irregular, owing to a morbid condition of the cellular mem-
brane beneath it, which is in a sloughing state : you see in a phage-
denic bubo, if you look attentively, that the cellular membrane under
the skin is in a sloughing state. There is an increased number of
blood-vessels, over which the skin hangs loosely, and the ragged edges
of the sore are owing to a want of action in the part, the blood being
retained in it on account of there not being sufficient freedom to carry
it into the system. This kind of sore arises, then, from the cellular
tissue, and it is difficult to give life to it, because it becomes consider-
ably excavated, and the skin hangs loosely over it. The best treatment



504 diseases of the mouth and throat.



that you can employ, is a saturated solution of the nitrate of silver :
dossils of lint, wetted with this lotion, should be daily applied to the
surface and edges of the wound, and the liquor calcis, with lime water,
should also be used. Oil-silk should be put over the wound, to prevent
it getting dry ; for, if it becomes dry, there is great danger of the gan-
grene spreading; therefore, the part should be kept wet, and this you
do by covering it with the oil-silk, to prevent evaporation. This, then,
is the treatment of a phagedenic ulcer. Mr. Welbank, a surgeon, in
Chancery-lane, has recommended the application of nitric acid in an
undiluted state, with the view of forming a new surface. This gentle-
man has tried it with advantage, at the same time preserving the consti-
tution by restoring the secretions, and supporting the patient by a most
nutritious diet. You should give bark and ammonia, in combination
with the opium ; and do all that you can to restore the secretions, for
this ought to be the first principle of your treatment.

DISEASES OF THE MOUTH AND THROAT.

The venereal poison, when it passes the absorbent glands in the
groin, goes into the system, but, in its course, affects no other glands
but these ; it is carried through the thoracic duct to the blood, and,
when in the blood, it appears to affect but three parts of the body : 1st.
The mucous membrane of the throat and nose. 2d. The skin, or sur-
face of the body. 3d. The periosteum and bones. These three are the
only parts liable to the syphilitic action after the venereal virus has
entered the blood ; and, with respect to the organs essential to life,
these are not capable of having a syphilitic action excited in them ;
only in those parts of the body subjected to the influence of external
causes, is the syphilitic action observed ; the internal organs are entirely
free from it ; the brain, the viscera of the chest and abdomen, are never
affected by it ; even the mucous membrane of the interior of the body
is not affected by it.

I will now describe to you the appearance and consequences of the
diseases of the throat. When the syphilitic action is set up in the
mouth, either the mucous membrane of the floor of the nose, or the roof
of the mouth, becomes red and inflamed, and a pimple forms on it ;
when this opens, the bony palate is exposed, which may be easily felt by
applying a probe to the part : this is the manner in which the disease
first shews itself. The exposed bone exfoliates, a communication is set
up through the mouth and nose, fluids return through it, and the voice
becomes nasal. In this disastrous state the unhappy patient is unfitted for
society ; with an aperture in the roof of the mouth, he lias a discharge
from it of a most offensive smell, to which the smell of the dissecting-



i



li



DISEASES OF THE MOUTH AND THROAT. 505



room is not to be compared ; for I can assure you it is with difficulty
that I can bear the breath of a person with disease of the mouth or
nose ; but, independently of this, he is stamped by a nasal voice, and
the fluids which he takes returns through the communication set up
between the mouth and nose. It is a state, gentlemen, to which death
is far preferable ; therefore, do not look on syphilis as a trifling disease.
The tonsil glands become affected with sores, which have exactly the
character of chancre, having rugged edges, a yellow surface, and a
livid colour in the surrounding part. A sense of dryness is felt in the
throat, which spreads up the eustachian tubes to the ear. But still
worse effects of the disease are seen on the pharynx, just opposite to the
mouth ; it is not unfrequent that ulceration proceeds through it and the
cellular membrane behind to the vertebra: ; but the worst effect of all
produced by the syphilitic action are found on the larynx, which require
immediate attention as soon as they shew themselves; and in a short space
of time, if not checked, destroy life. Attending this affection, there is
always loss of the voice, so that you are obliged to put your ear to the
patient’s mouth, he speaks in so low a whisper. If he has no primary
symptoms of syphilis on him at the time, you are not led at first to
suspect that it is syphilitic ; although, whenever a person comes to you
with loss of voice, you should always ask, how long it is since he had
any sore on his yard ? What space of time has elapsed since he had
syphilis ? — This effect of the syphilitic disease more frequently destroys
life than any other. Here is a specimen (exhibiting it to the class)
taken from a female who died of this complaint. She was admitted
into the hospital with a bronchocele ; she had difficulty of breathing,
and little power of utterance, which were attributed to the pressure of
the tumour on the larynx. When she had been in the hospital a little
time, syphilitic eruption made its appearance, by which it was dis-
covered she had not very long ago had syphilis. Mercury was given
her, but the disease had proceeded too far, and she died a few days after.
On examining the throat, chancres were found, one on each side of the
upper part of the larynx ; there was no disease whatever of the lungs.
The ulceration had proceeded to the laryngeal artery : this had given
way, and part of the blood passed into the trachea. Portions pf the
thyroid cartilages are sometimes ossified in this disease, and coughed up.
One of the cornua of thyroid cartilage was coughed up by a patient of
Air. lorster’s, at the other hospital; it was converted into bone; the
patient did very well.

The treatment required in syphilitic sore throat is as follows: — It
will be necessary to make use of mercury if the part is not too irritable,
and the sore has no other character than in a healthy person, and does



x x



506 diseases of the mouth and throat.

not affect the mouth more than is generally done when the syphilis ap-
pears in any other part. Here you must endeavour to prevent the dis-
ease making those dreadful ravages which 1 have described, on the soft
palate and upper maxillary bone, producing an aperture which requires
artificial means to close it. Mercurial fumigations are found the most
efficient local means for sores of the palate ; but if the roof of the mouth
itself becomes affected, a little diluted muriatic or nitric acid will assist
exfoliation, and prevent the aperture from being large. When the sores
are on the tonsils, local means are not necessary, for a considerable
portion of the tonsils may be lost, without any bad effects being pro-
duced; constitutional remedies alone are generally employed. But,
with respect to myself, I am disposed to assist, by local means, the
healing of syphilitic sores, wherever they occur. When an aperture has
been produced in the roof of the mouth, I put a piece of lint into the
opening, and the consequence is, that the person does not speak through
his nose so much, and is not exposed to the observations of his friends.
As soon as the exfoliation has taken place, it will be right to introduce
some extraneous substance to fill up the aperture ; and the best instru-
ment I know is one contrived by Mr. Weiss, whom you all know to be an
extremely ingenious man. A gentleman of rank and fortune, who had
a fissure in the roof of the mouth, applied to Mr. W eiss, to know whether
he could make him something which would fill up the opening, and
remain there without producing inconvenience. Mr. Weiss immediately
produced an instrument which gave him great comfort and satisfaction,
and answers much better than any other with which I am acquainted.

When there is disease on the soft palate, nothing can be worn, because
any instrument, unless kept near the bone, would excite inflammation.
M. Roux, of La Charitd, at Paris, in a case of division of the soft
palate, performed an operation for the purpose of closing the aperture,
on the same principle as the operation for hare-lip. The operation
was successful ; it is certainly a very ingenious one. I think a gentle-
man at the west end of the town has also performed this operation :
if any of you recollect his name, 1 shall be obliged if you will men-
tion it ; (here several students stated that it was Mr. Alcock.) Mr.
Alcoek, then, gentlemen, has also performed this operation. Sir
Astley then said, that he thought the union of a division of the soft
palate had been attempted by some one else, when one of the pupils
replied, “ that it had been by Mr. Brodie.” I was not aware that Mr.
Biodie had performed this operation — are you sure of it, sir? This
being answered in the affirmative, the learned professor said that the
operation similar to M. Roux’s had been performed by Mr. Alcock,
and (I must, however, mention my friend Mr. Brodie’s name on



ON SYPHILIS AFFECTING THE NOSE. 5l>7

authority, pointing to the student who first mentioned it) by Mr.
Brodie.

With respect to affections of the larynx, you must act immediately
on the system by mercury ; I use the oxymurias hydrargyri, because
it is the quickest in its operation. Mercurial fumigations locally,
and the oxymurias hydrargyri internally, these are what I now employ.
Some give the blue pill and opium, but I prefer the oxymuriate,
on account of its speedy effect.



LECTURE LXIV.

The next subject to which I shall direct your attention is the in-
fluence of

SYPHILIS AFFECTING THE NOSE.

The mucous membrane of the nose is liable to be affected by this
disease, as well as the mucous membrane of the throat. Ulceration
in this part very speedily affects the bones, which afterwards exfoliate,
and the patient will be in danger of losing a considerable portion of
his nose. The following are the symptoms which indicates the exist-
ence of this disease: The first circumstance of which the patient
complains, is an incrustation forming on the nose. On this incrus-
tation being removed by the hand, a quantity of blood mixed with
purulent matter is discharged. In two or three days, similar incrus-
tations are formed, and under these an ulceration takes place, which
frequently lays bare the bone, and occasions the process of exfolia-
tion. The bones very often separate by exfoliation, long after the
syphilitic action has ceased. The number of bones which separate
in this way is often very considerable : there is a preparation on the
table, in which you will have an opportunity of observing a number
of bones, which separated from the nose by exfoliation, in the
same individual. Here is another example, in which the disease
also made considerable progress in this part. The treatment of
syphilis in the nose, is similar to the treatment of it in other parts of
the body. The constitutional treatment is precisely the same, but, in
addition to the constitutional treatment, local applications should be
employed. Fumigating the part is attended with some advantage ; in-
jecting lotions are also sometimes found to be beneficial. Lotions of
diluted nitric, or muriatic acid may be used with a view of healing the
sores, and assisting the process of exfoliation. Fumigations are used in
clearing the nose of the accumulated incrustations. Steaming the nose
with hot water, assists in separating the incrustations, and affords con-



508 ON SYPHILIS AFFECTING THE NOSE.

siderable relief to the patient. Such is the treatment under ordinary
circumstances. If the bones of the nose have not become affected,
there will be no great difficulty in conducting the cure, but there are
cases in which very considerable difficulties will be encountered, and in
which the most horrible deformities will frequently be the result. In
general, you are to consider these deformities, as the result. Dot of sy-
philis, but of the improper treatment of that disease. I will tell you
what very often happens in cases of syphilitic disease in the nose. The
patient undergoes a mercurial treatment, and the sores appear to be
cured ; but, when the mercury has been left off for a time, and the person
has returned to his ordinary employments, he finds the discharge again
appearing in the nose, and, as it becomes offensive, applies to a medical
man. Under such circumstances, it is frequently supposed that, though
he has undergone a treatment which is usually sufficient for the cure of
syphilis, the disease is not yet completely subdued, and he is put under
a second course of mercury. This, gentlemen, is not only unnecessary,
but extremely injurious to the patient. The disease of the nose is not
the result of syphilis, but it arises from the process of exfoliation in an
exposed portion of bone. During the time the mercury is given, the
sores heal, and the bone becomes dry. There is no discharge at this
period, but after a time the process of exfoliation produces irritation
and ulceration of the mucous membrane of the nose, which is generally,
but erroneously supposed to be syphilitic. If the patient, time after
time, be subjected to fresh courses of mercury, these add to the mis-
chief, and the most horrible deformities often ensue. The mercury,
instead of assisting the exfoliation which is going on, adds to the in-
flammation, and produces other and most extensive exfoliations. Under
proper treatment, no person, perhaps, ever lost his nose from syphilis,
but the instances are very numerous in which this loss has arisen from
the abuse of mercury. To prevent the great deformity which will arise in
such cases, if an opening be formed through the skin in the upper part
of the nose, a probe should be introduced, to feel for the loose ossa nasi,
which should be removed by a pair of forceps. The nose will be some-
what altered ; there will be some deformity, but not that horrible de-
formity which ensues, if the skin is allowed to give way in the upper
part of the nose. Evaporating lotions should at the same time be em-
ployed, to prevent ulceration taking place through the skin. I witnessed,
very early in life, a most unfortunate case of disease of the nose, which
was occasioned by maltreatment, and which ruined the happiness and
prosperity of the individual in whom it occurred. This person had em-
barked in business with the greatest possible degree of success, and his
prospects were of the most flattering description. lie retired, for a time,



ON SYPHILITIC ERUPTIONS.



509



from his business, in consequence of a sore in his nose (accompanied
with incrustations) which was believed by his surgeon to have been in
the first instance syphilitic. A slight mercurial course was employed
for his cure, and he got apparently well ; but a short time after, the
discharge from his nose returned. This led the surgeon to think that
he had not been completely cured, and he accordingly put him upon a
second course of mercury. Extensive exfoliations took place, and the
bridge of his nose was sunk. Under these circumstances, he was
ashamed of appearing in business, and was under the necessity of con-
signing it to other hands. The disease of the nose was still not entirely
subdued, and he was put under a third course of mercury. This led to
the inflammation of the skin, the ossa nasi separated through it, and the
most horrible deformity was produced. The state of his breath, and
the smell issuing from his nose, were most offensive ; he was obliged to
seclude himself entirely from all society, his prospects in life were com-
pletely ruined, his business went to decay, and he died in poverty and
wretchedness. As these circumstances occurred to a man in a higher
state of society than that in which we usually meet with such deplorable
cases, they made a strong impression on my mind. Be upon your
guard, therefore, against treating a renewed discharge from the nose as
syphilitic, on the supposition that the mercury previously employed has
not been sufficient to subdue the disease.

The next subject of which I shall speak is that of

SYPHILITIC ERUPTIONS.

Syphilitic eruptions are the mildest of the secondary symptoms of the
venereal disease, and, in general, admit of an easy cure. The common
character of syphilitic eruption is, that they are of a copper colour,
rising a little above the surface of the skin, and, if they go on to ulcera-
tion, form thick incrustations. They are attended with very little pain ;
an itching, rather than a painful sensation, is felt in the part, which in-
creases a little in the evening. There is a great variety in the character
of venereal eruptions, with respect to size; in fact, you very rarely see
the eruptions in one patient exactly like those which occur in another,
(io round the syphilitic wards to-morrow, and examine the appear-
ances of the eruptions in the different patients who have that symptom ;
you will scarcely find them exactly alike in any two patients, in point
of colour or of size. In some, you will find the eruptions of consider-
able magnitude, appearing as if a portion of copper skin was laid down
upon the surface, but unattended with ulceration. In others, you will
observe deep ulceration, with a very ragged edge; in others, there will
be scaly eruptions, covering very large surfaces in various parts of the

x x 2



510



ON SYPHILITIC ERUPTIONS.

body. There is greater variety in the character of venereal eruptions
than in any other symptom of the disease. You may satisfy your-
selves of this fact by going round the hospitals, and at the same time
appreciate the pretensions of those persons who ascribe one uniform
character to this symptom of the disease. With respect to the parts in
which venereal eruptions most frequently appear in the first instance,
they are the head, face, and roots of the hair. Incrustations form
about the hair of the head, and scabs appear on the forehead, breast,
the palms of the hands, and sometimes the soles of the feet. The palms
of the hands are more frequently attacked with venereal eruptions than
other parts of the body, because there is more vigour of circulation in
these parts ; the parts where the circulation is more feeble, are less
liable to be attacked. The treatment of venereal eruptions is of the
most simple kind. You will pursue the same constitutional treatment
that I have already advised ; give ten grains of the blue pill united with
opium, at night, and five in the morning ; or five grains at night, and
five in the morning. The pilula submuriatis hydrargyri composita, or
Plummer’s pill, combined with the decoction of sarsaparilla, is some-
times employed for the cure of this venereal symptom. Five grains of
Plummer’s pill may be given at night, and half a pint of the decoction
drunk daily. The compound decoction of sarsaparilla will remove this
symptom for a time, but the disease will re-appear, and you are never
sure that the patient will not return with syphilitic symptoms. Even
Plummer’s pill, united with the compound decoction of sarsaparilla, un-
less it be continued for a very considerable time, cannot be depended
upon. It should be given from six weeks at least to two months, to
prevent a return of the disease. The eruptions will often yield in a
very short time, but, unless you continue the medicine till the syphi-
litic action is destroyed, the disease will return. Nothing can be
more absurd — nothing can show a greater ignorance of the true prin-
ciple of treatment which should be followed in this disease, than to
suspend the use of the medicine, as soon as the symptoms disappear.
Venereal eruptions sometimes show an irritable disposition, as well as
other symptoms of the disease from which the parts will be in danger
of sloughing. Whenever this irritable disposition appears, suspend' the
use of mercury, and give the compound decoction of sarsaparilla alone,
in considerable quantities. It will be better not to combine the decoction
with mercury in any form ; if you add any thing, let it be opium and
nitric acid. The opium lessens irritability, and the nitric acid has
sometimes a specific action on sores of this kind. Irritable eruptions
are very often improved by the exhibition of nitric acid, which not only
has a specific effect on them, but restores the general health of the



SYPHILITIC DISEASES OF THE BONES. 511

patient. If the opium disagrees with the stomach of the patient it will
defeat the object of restoring his general health, and in that case should
not be combined with the nitric acid. With respect to local treatment,
die best application is mercurial ointment with opium ; an ounce of the
ointment, with a drachm of the extract of opium. This, and the nitric
acid lotion, diminish irritability better than any other application. The
epithema, composed of the liquor, plumbi subacetatis with the melrosse,
and tinctura opii, is often found to be useful. Carrot poultices, die
solution of the nitrate of silver, and a great variety of applications, are
employed with die same view.

I shall now proceed to describe to you the






SYPHILITIC DISEASES OF THE PERIOSTEUM, AND BOXES.

The third effect of the syphilitic poison is on the periosteum, and on
the bones. It first attacks the periosteum, and the bones subsequently
become affected. The cylindrical bones, which are most exposed to
vicissitudes of temperature, are commonly first attacked ; those which
are much covered by muscle are rarely affected. The back part of the
tibia, for instance, which is covered by muscles, is very rarely affected
with nodes, though nothing is more common than to see venereal nodes
on the shin bone, which is only covered with skin and periosteum.
Sometimes they are seated on the outer side of die tibia, towards the
fibula : if they are seated on the fibula, it is where it is only slightly
covered ; and if on the ulna, it is where it i3 covered only by skin and
periosteum. Nodes on the os humeri, except on the outer side, are of a
very rare occurrence. The symptoms by which this disease is cha-
racterized, are as follow : — Some weeks after the chancre has healed, the
patient experiences in the evening a sensation of pain in the bone,
which is afterwards the seat of the node. This pain does not imme-
diately produce a swelling ; but, in the course of a few days, a swelling
appears in the evening, which disappears again on the following morn-
ing. It is excessively tender and painful in the evening; but in the
morning, it is hardly perceptible ; there is scarcely any swelling or
tenderness. At this time the periosteum only is affected ; but, when
the inflammadon has continued for some time longer, the bone is affected
and soon becomes enlarged. I shall send you round two preparations,
in which you may observe the thickening of the periosteum, and the
enlargement of the bones produced by syphilis. The first effect is an
inflammation of the periosteum ; but, in a short time, a deposit takes
place between it and the surface of the bone; this deposit is, in the first
instance, only a serous fluid, but a cartilaginous substance is soon
secreted, which is gradually converted into bone. Though, in the first



512 SYPHILITIC DISEASES OF THE BONES.

instance, therefore, there is only an inflammation of the periosteum, the
fluid secreted in consequence of this inflammation is soon converted into
an ossific enlargement. The treatment of this disease is not different
from that which is necessary for the other symptoms of syphilis. Give
the blue pill united with opium ; the compound decoction of sarsaparilla
is sometimes added, with a view of preventing any disposition to irri-
tability in the diseased part. This, however, is not necessary ; the blue
pill, with opium, will be sufficient to effect the cure. As to any local
treatment, no other will be necessary, except the simple application of
evaporating lotions, which certainly assist in getting rid of inflammation.
When the inflammation has ceased, if there is any enlargement of the
bone, a stimulating plaster, as the emplastrum ammoniaci cum hy-
drargyro, should be employed. There is on the table a great variety
of preparations, exhibiting specimens of nodes, which will be worth
your examination after the lecture. The skeleton on the table affords
a curious illustration of the effect produced by mercury on the bones.
Though the treatment of nodes, when attended to early, is very simple,
cases sometimes occur in which considerable difficulty arises. You will
sometimes find a considerable quantity of serous fluid fluctuating
between the periosteum and bone. When this fluctuation is unaccom-
panied with inflammation and redness of the skin, there will be no
necessity to cut down upon the bone; if you do so, you will run the
risk of producing exfoliation. Such a fluctuation as this may be
removed by adding a little to the influence of mercury. I have seen
large accumulations of serum in the forehead and shin-bone entirely
absorbed by giving an additional quantity of mercury, and assisting
absorption by the application of a blister. When the fluctuation, how-
ever, is accompanied with an appearance of redness in the skin, and
much pain in the part, indicating the presence of matter, it will be
impossible to promote absorption by any means, and the sooner an
incision down to the bone is made the better. The exfoliation which
will afterwards take place, will be proportioned to the extent of surface
laid bare ; and if you delay making the opening till the extent of the
surface affected is very considerable, you will only be adding to the evil.
As soon, therefore, as you discover a fluctuation, accompanied with
redness of the skin, make an incision for the purpose of discharging the
matter. Very extensive exfoliations sometimes follow the opening of
nodes, and the life of the patient v/ill be in danger. Many persons die
from this cause ; there is in the college a very fine specimen, taken
from a person who died in consequence of the exfoliations which fol-
lowed the openings of nodes in both his tibiae. The flat bones are
sometimes the subject of syphilitic symptoms ; that which is more



SYPHILITIC DISEASES OF THE BONES. 513

commonly affected than any other, is the os frontis. The symptoms are
the same as those of nodes on the shins. The patient has pain and
swelling in the evening, which last till two or three o’clock in the
morning, when they disappear. This continues, day after day, until
an enlargement of the bone is produced. Nodes now and then occur in
the parietal bones, very rarely in the os occipitis, and never in the os
temporis, that bone being much covered by muscles, and exposed to
very little change of temperature. The os frontis, which is the most
exposed of the bones of the head, is that in which the disease is most
frequently seen. It sometimes happens, when this disease attacks the
flat bones, that it is attended with a very considerable tumour and fluc-
tuation. No incision should be made under such circumstances. Now
and then, indeed, the suppurative process takes place, and a most
serious disease is the result. When the skin is inflamed, and matter is
formed beneath, it will be right to discharge it. It often happens, when
matter is formed on the surface of the bone, that the suppurative process
also takes place between the dura mater and the internal part of the
skull. Death sometimes ensues from this cause ; but fatal consequences
may often be prevented by trephining the patient. A patient in the
other hospital had a node on the os frontis, which suppurated: the
matter was discharged, but some time after the patient complained of
violent pain in the head, which was succeeded by coma, so that there
was no doubt in the mind of the surgeon of the hospital that the patient
was the subject of pressure on the brain. The surgeon determined to tre-
phine him ; and, on raising a portion of exfoliating bone, a quantity of
matter directly issued beneath. The old surgeons were in the habit
of perforating the bone, for the purpose of discharging the matter
formed beneath. The best mode of saving the life of the patient, how-
ever, is to apply the trephine : and, by taking out a portion of the exfo-
liating bone, give immediate relief to the brain, by removing the pres-
sure produced by the matter formed between the dura mater and the
bone. There is a specimen on the table, taken from a case in which
the operation was successful. The man died, many weeks after the
operation, in a comatose state ; and, upon examination after death, it
appeared that matter had formed under the sagittal suture, which pressed
upon the brain, and was the cause of death. He was relieved by the
first operation, and he would probably have been relieved again by
similar treatment, but there was not sufficient evidence of the existence
of matter to justify a repetition of the operation. Whenever you are
called to a case in which exfoliation of the bones of the skull is accom-
panied with symptoms ol pressure on the brain, you may infer that



514 SYPHILITIC DISEASES OF THE BONES.

matter has formed between the dura mater and the bone, and it will be
right to apply the trephine. This observation applies not only to cases
of syphilitic diseases, but to all cases of exfoliation of the bones of the
skull, accompanied with coma. Here is a skull (exhibiting it to the
class), originally affected with syphilis : see, gentlemen, what a lan-
tern it became. The subject of this disease died, as I believe, chiefly
from the injudicious continuance of mercury. He was a man of bad
constitution, and there was great difficulty in curing the primary
symptoms of the disease. He had, subsequently, a node on the fore-
head, which was followed by inflammation and suppuration of other
parts of the head, till the ulcerative process extended over the whole
surface. He died ultimately of anasarca. It can scarcely have escaped
your observation, that patients applying for admission to the hospital
frequently complain of having pains all over them. They will tell you
that they have pains down their arms and legs, which become worse at
night when they are warm in bed, and that they have formerly had
some venereal complaint, for which mercury has been given till the
mouth has been rendered severely sore. If you ask them whether they
were exposed to cold during the time they took the mercury, they will I
answer in the affirmative. Such persons, gentlemen, we do not admit
into the hospitals : we only tell them to take care of themselves, and to
keep themselves as warm as possible, and that, after a time, the disease
will disappear. These pains are readily distinguishable from those
which proceed from the syphilitic poison. Syphilitic pains commonly
attack the shins, but they never put their hands to this part of the body. !|
They complain of pains from the upper to the lower part of the arm ; ij
pains about the chest and about the hips. These are mercurial, not ij
venereal pains. You have an opportunity of seeing an example of this I
disease in the skeleton on the table, in which the mercury has affected
the ribs, the sternum, the tibia, and, in short, almost every bone in the
body. A deposit of earthy matter is formed between the periosteum
and the bone, so as to case the surface of the bone. Patients suffer
exceedingly from mercurial diseases of the bones, much more indeed 1
than from syphilitic. You should direct them to pay strict attention
to temperature, and give them the compound decoction of sarsaparilla.
This plan of treatment will be sufficient for the cure of this disease. 1
shall, in the next evening’s lecture, close the subject of syphilis by
some general remarks on that disease.



ON SYPHILIS, AND THE USE OF MERCURY. 515



LECTURE LXV.

I shall, to-night, deviate from my usual custom, and give this even-
ing's Lecture from notes. T he subjects of it will be,

GENERAL REMARKS ON SYPHILIS, AND ON THE USE OF
MERCURY.

The symptoms of syphilis are divided into primary and secondary.
Chancre and bubo come under the former denomination ; and, under the
latter, sore throat, eruptions, nodes, and diseases of the nose : these
secondary symptoms are the consequences of the absorption of the vene-
real poison into the system, and its circulation through the blood.

Some parts of the body are incapable of being acted upon by the
venereal poison, as the brain, heart, and abdominal viscera; iudeed, the
venereal poison does not appear to he capable of exercising its destruc-
tive influence on the vital organs, or those parts most essential to the
welfare and continuance of life ; but the bones, muscles, tendons, and
skin, readily partake of its malignant nature. As some parts of the
body more readily take on the venereal action than others, so some in-
dividuals are much sooner than others infected by the venereal poison.
Many men (to their shame be it spoken) make a boast of having kept
every description of female society, and yet having always escaped from
any attacks of the venereal disease, gonorrhoea as well as chancre.

The time at which the secondary symptoms usually appear, is from
eight to sixteen weeks generally, sometimes between those two periods;
eight weeks may be taken as the earliest period, and sixteen as the most
remote ; but, in both respects, there is a large number of exceptions,
for the secondary symptoms are continually appearing at an earlier date
than the eighth week, and at a much later one than the sixteenth. As
a general remark, I may observe, that the tenth week is the most usual
time at which they appear ; sometimes the appearance of the secondary
symptoms is protracted, in consequence of the system labouring or
suffering under the irritation of another disease, as diarrhoea for
example. In my notes I have written down a number of questions,
and which questions I used to be in the habit of putting to myself : you
shall now hear what they are ; and first, Is a child liable lo be affected
by syphilis when in ulero 9 — Mr. Hunter said, that a child in utero
could not be affected by this disease ; now, Mr. Hunter was, unques-
tionably, a man who possessed so much judgment in his profession, that
his opinions are entitled to the greatest respect and attention ; he is an
authority to which we are all inclined to Low with deference and sub-






516 ON SYPHILIS, AND THE USE OF MERCURY.

mission. We must not, however, think too highly of his opinion in
opposition to facts, which we have ourselves observed ; and, if I know
any thing of my profession, I have seen syphilis in a child immediately
after birth ; therefore, in this particular instance, Mr. Hunter was mis-
taken. Within twenty-four hours after their entrance into the world,
such children have the palms of their hands, the soles of their feet, and
the nates, covered with copper-coloured eruptions, and the nails, at the
same time, generally beginning to peel off ; and unless something be
done for the little sufferers, they will be quickly carried off from the
violence of the disease ; indeed, many children die from it, in conse-
quence of the true nature of the complaint not being understood by the
medical practitioner. In these cases you give the mother a quantity of
mercury, the influence of which is communicated to the child, through
the medium of the milk, and it becomes cured of the syphilitic disease.

A most curious circumstance connected with this subject is, that
a woman, when pregnant, cannot be cured of syphilis : you give mer-
cury, and cause the disappearance of the primary symptoms ; but,
after delivery, the secondary effects are very soon manifested in different
parts of the body ; the primary symptoms, therefore, are relieved as
quickly as usual, but it is evident that the poison is not eradicated from
the constitution, by disease breaking forth immediately after the birth of
the child. I once saw a lady, six months advanced in pregnancy hav-
ing an extensive syphilitic eruption, for which mercury was administered, !
and the eruption disappeared : after this she went her full time, but ||
when delivered, the nates of the child, together with the palms of the
hands and the soles of the feet, were covered by a genuine syphilitic
eruption. I gave the child hydrarg. cum. cret. ; under this treatment
it manifested little improvement.

A month afterwards I saw the mother ; she had an ulcerated sore
throat and syphilis, altogether as well marked as in any case I ever
witnessed; mercury was again given to her, when Loth parent and child jill
perfectly recovered. Since the occurrence of the above case, I have !
witnessed several similar ones, in each of which the secondary symptoms ifi
could not be completely cured during the pregnant state. I think, how-
ever, that a pregnant woman may be cured of the primary syphilitic |
symptoms, although not of the secondary.

The next question I have put down in my notes is this : — Docs much in
Inflammation usually attend, Syphilis? — No direct answer can be given
to this question, for the degree of inflammation which attends it is pro-
portioned to the healthy or irritable state of the patient. In a healthy
person the venereal disease is slow in its progress, and but little inflam-
mation accompanies it : on the other hand, in the irritable person it is



ON SYPHILIS AND THE USE OF MERCURY. 517



rapid in its progress, and accompanied by considerable inflammatory
action ; therefore, the differences which characterize the syphilitic disease
in various persons do not arise from any peculiarity of the poison itself,
but from the peculiar condition of the person on whom it falls : exactly
similar to what often happens in small-pox : two men receiving the
infection from the same individual shall have the disease, one par-
ticularly mild, while, in the other, it is of a malignant confluent kind ;
therefore, the degree of inflammation, or manifestations of violence,
which mark the course of the disease, are not to be attributed to any
peculiarity existing in the poison, but solely from the particular condi-
tion of the infected person. Although syphilis is not at first a malig-
nant, yet it must always be considered a serious complaint, and should
command the most decided attention. Though not at first malignant,
consisting merely of chancre or bubo, it soon becomes so, and, unless
its progress be checked, it will be marked by the secondary symptoms,
which I have already described.

Therefore, in answer to the question just now put, what I should say
is this — one constitution, upon receiving the venereal poison, will have
in it a considerable degree of inflammatory action excited, quickly lead-
ing to the destruction of life, whilst another constitution will scarcely be
influenced by the reception of the venereal poison. The next question
I ask myself is, Whether there is any Constitutional Affection produced
in Syphilitic Disease 9 I am again compelled to say, that that great
authority, Mr. Hunter, is also wrong here; for he has stated that the
disease is merely local. What, gentlemen, should I say if one of you
were to come to me to-morrow, stating that you had a chancre about
eight, nine, or ten weeks ago, and that you had felt yourself exceed-
ingly indisposed, having evening exacerbations, fever and sore throat,
and that at length your body had become covered with a copper-coloured
eruption ; how can we say that there is no constitutional affection here ?
Do not the evening s exacerbations, which commence about five o’clock,
and do not terminate till two, or later, in the morning, plainly shew that
tlie disease, when so far advanced, is constitutional ? Most certainly
it is so, and can scarcely be any longer a matter of dispute.

It is not necessary that you should study much, for the purpose* of
being enabled to understand this constitutional influence : go to-morrow
into the foul wards ot these hospitals, find any man there having vene-
real sore throat ; you will ask him but very few questions before you
are convinced that the constitutional influence has been produced. The
next question I have put down is, Whether the Matter of secondary
Venereal Ulcer be infectious or not ?— Mr. Hunter said that it was not
so ; however, for my own part, from what I have both seen and heard,

Y Y



518 ON SYPHILIS AND THE USE OF MERCURY.



I should hesitate a considerable time before I could join in this asser-
tion. A physician of my acquaintance witnessed the following case : —

A gentleman came from the country in an exceedingly anxious state
of mind, and evidently very much agitated, for the purpose of consult-
ing him respecting an eruption which existed on the body of his lady ;
accordingly the doctor visited the lady, and found the eruption to be
venereal. The doctor asked the gentleman how long he had been mar-
ried, and he replied, six months : he added, that four months before
marriage he had a sore on the penis, which was healed by local appli-
cations : three months after marriage both his wife and himself had had
sore throats, which were soon cured by taking mercury. During this
time, and during the existence of the venereal eruptions, not knowing
the nature of the complaint, the connubial intercourse had been con-
tinued. Now, if any dependence can be placed upon the report of this
gentleman, the case is most decisive of the matter of secondary ulcer
being capable of propagating the disease, for he had no primary symp-
toms by which the complaint could have been communicated to his
wife, as the chancre was healed four months previous to marriage. I
do not know, but I believe the disease may be communicated through
the influence of the parent’s or the nurse’s milk. I believe that I have
seen examples of this description. — Is the Matter of Bubo infectious ?
— Not so far as experiments have gone. The matter of bubo inserted
in the skin has produced no appearance of chancre ; for my own part,
I think there is but very little difference between the matter of bubo

and that of common abscess Are Gonorrhoea and Syphilis the same

disease ? — On this point there is no difficulty for any one to satisfy
himself, and he will soon be convinced that there are no two diseases in
the world more decidedly different. Now, gentlemen, to prove this, let
a man who has had a very bad gonorrhoea apply four or half a dozen of
leeches near the glans penis, and then draw over the skin, so that the
sores made by the leeches may be imbedded in the gonorrhoeal matter ;
well, gentlemen, will chancres be the consequence ? Will secondary
symptoms ensue as consequences of the experiment ? No ; neither one
nor the other will be seen, and one cannot well conceive a more conclu-
sive fact than thi3.

Mr. Thurston, in 1801, made the following experiment on a young
Cantab, who had gonorrhoea in an excessive degree, with ardor urinte.
Mr. Thurston took some of the discharge, and introduced it into the
prepuce ; he inserted it in two places, thus making two sores ; both
wounds, however, healed kindly, without producing the slightest ap-
pearance of chancre, or the most trivial constitutional symptoms. After
such experiments as these, it would be madness to say the two diseases



ii



ON SYPHILIS AND THE USE OF MERCURY. 519

were alike ; and those persons who think so entertain wrong notions of
the subject, or, unfortunately, their minds may be governed by preju-
dice, and consequently are incapable of receiving proper impressions.
Let me urge you, therefore not to continue to think that gonorrhoea
and syphilis are the same disease. The next question is this : Are
those parts of the Body, which are liable to Syphilis, subject to other
Diseases similar in appearance to Syphilis ? — Yes; the glans penis,
for example, is subject to ulceration from various causes, , and the
ulcers, occasionally, very much resemble chancre : this last sore, how-
ever, often possesses a specific character, by which its true nature can,
with the utmost correctness, be ascertained. Although you are fre-
quently enabled to determine that a sore is really chancrous, and are
thus capable of confidently asserting that it is syphilitic, yet, at the
same time, there is often great difficulty in saying what is not so ; for
example, excoriations may exist on the glans, to which syphilitic matter
may have been applied, and the poison may have entered into the con-
stitution through the medium of those broken surfaces, without having
time to produce in the sores themselves the true syphilitic character ; if,
therefore, a patient were to come to you under such circumstances and
after having had connexion with a suspicious person, if he were to in-
quire of you whether the sores were syphilitic or not, you had better
explain to him what I have just stated to you, and likewise tell him,
that although the ulcers have not then the syphilitic aspect, yet that he
may in reality be infected, but that there has not been sufficient time
for the parts to assume their peculiarly marked syphilitic character ;
tell him to make his mind easy, watch the appearance of the parts, let
him wait and see the result, without subjecting himself at all hazards
to a course of mercury, for the cure of a disease which never required
its employment. Mercury, itself, unfortunately produces diseases very
similar, both in appearance and effect, to syphilis. I recollect, at the
commencement of my studies at these hospitals, one day, on going
round the wards with a surgeon, having been very much surprised to
see mercury so indiscriminately employed, and at seeing every poor
emaciated wretch continually rubbing in ; there was one individual, I
remember, in a dreadful state, who had been using mercury for a great
length of time, and under which treatment he continued to get rather
worse than better ; in this case I took the liberty of suggesting the pro-
priety of discontinuing the mercury, when, in a short time, the patient
became completely cured. Mercury, in reality, when given injudiciously,
or to excess, will sometimes produce ulcers, which a mart of little expe-
rience would say -were venereal. Again, in ulcerated sore throats, a
careless observer might mistake common ulcers for venereal ones ; the



520 ON SYPHILIS AND THE USE OF MERCURY.



former, however, are known to be superficial, and may generally be
removed by ordinary purgatives, whereas, the latter are deep, with
elevated edges, having the same appearance as chancres on the penis. I
recollect a gentleman once coming to me, and standing before me as
well as he could : “ Pray, sir,” said he, “ what do you think is the
matter with me ?” “ What ?” said I, “ why, you are poxed up to the
eyes seeing him in such a state, this was my involuntary reply ; not
the most elegant, certainly. I told him that he was not then in a fit
state to take mercury, being emaciated, and in a state of great irrita-
bility, and that he had better, for a time, go to the sea-side, use the
warm bath, and then return to me again. Some time after he did re-
turn to me, so much altered that I" did not know him, for he was look-
ing florid, and had grown quite lusty. He told me that he had come
back perfectly recovered, without having taken a single grain of mer-
cury ; therefore, gentlemen, when you see disease situated in those parts
liable to syphilis, you should be particularly cautious in forming your
judgment, and take care not to submit your patient to a course of mer-
cury, which will probably render his condition a thousand times worse.
Before you administer a course of mercury, you should possess the
most unequivocal evidence of its being required : and when you are
in doubt as to the nature of those diseases which resemble syphilis,
your best plan will be to administer five grains of the pill hydrarg.
submur. compos, omni nocte, et fviij. decoct, sarsaparil. compos, two
or three times in the day. These medicines will be found the best for
the cure of the disease upon the principle of restoring the secretions.

The next question is, Is Syphilis always progressive without the use
of Mercury ?— The answer will be found in the reply to the following
question : Is Chancre curable without the use of Mercury? — To this
I reply, that mercury is by no means necessary to procure the healing of
the chancres, at least not always. Some chancres certainly will not
heal without mercuiy, and this is more especially the case when they are
deep seated, or of long standing ; but, on the other hand, when the sore
is slight, superficial, and recent, a wash composed of brandy and water, or
wine and water, will often cause them to heal without any other applica-
tion ; therefore, mercury is by no means always necessary to procure the
healing of chancres ; but chancre, as described by Mr. Hunter, according
to his account, will not heal without it ; it is now, however, well known
that the position taken by Mr. Hunter is untenable, and that mercury is
not in every instance necessary to accomplish the healing of chancres.

On the Influence of Mercury on the Human Body. — The modus
operandi of mercury has been supposed to be, that of exciting in the
system a general fever, which overcomes and subdues the syphilitic



ON SYPHILIS AND THE USE OF MERCURY. 52 1

action. This may or may not be true. God only knows. We are
well acquainted with the fact, that many medicines have a specific in-
fluence over certain diseases ; but we know nothing of the peculiar mode
of action on the part of the medicine by which it overpowers and
destroys the disease. Would not a man be laughed at, who attempted
to point out the manner in which bark cures ague, or colchicum gout ?
In the present state of our knowledge, it is impossible, satisfactorily, to
account for these phenomena ; sufficient experiments have not yet been
made to guide our judgment, or direct our minds towards a correct and
positive conclusion. To possess satisfactory information on this point
may be desirable; but I consider it of much more consequence to know
how to effectually cure a disease, and prevent its return. I say, if once
a surgeon permit the secondary symptoms of syphilis to appear, that it
is difficult to say where the dangerous consequences will terminate —
difficult to point out what may prove the sequel. Gentlemen, I can tell you
that, twenty years ago, it was considered a great disgrace to a surgeon
to permit secondary symptoms to appear: at that time the great object
was to effectually cure the primary symptoms, so as altogether to pre-
vent the occurrence of the secondary ; unfortunately, at the present time,
secondary symptoms present themselves to our notice, and much more
frequently than twenty years ago. I will tell you how it happens :
practitioners, at that period, were in the habit of giving mercury in every
case of venereal disease, whether primary or secondary, and adminis-
tered the remedy with a regularity and caution which I wish were
observed at the present day ; they used to exhibit the mercury not only
whilst the disease lasted, but for some time after it had disappeared ;
and their usual practice was to give it, three weeks for chancre, a month
for a chancre and bubo, and, if for secondary symptoms, the remedy
was continued for a still longer period. Though the disease should
disappear quickly after beginning the mercury, yet remember that it is
not cured, and the medicine should be continued for the above-men-
tioned period. If the medicine be omitted for two or three days, you
should consider this as so much lost time ; and it must not be forgotten
in the aggregate account. Three weeks will be generally found a suffi-
cient length of time for the cure of a chancre ; a month for a chancre and
bubo ; and, in case of secondary symptoms, the patient will not be safe
until the expiration of five or six weeks. Persons often go to medical
men with chancres, receive from practitioners a box or two of pills, and
are then sent about their business. A man had better never visit a
doctor at all than be submitted to such treatment as this : it is often
calculated to throw him off his guard, may lead him to suppose he is

Y Y 2



522 ON SYPHILIS AND THE USE OF MERCURY.

cured, when in reality he is not so, and may ultimately terminate in the
complete destruction of his constitution.

Semetimes mercury disagrees with the patient ; then, of course, you
must either discontinue it, or temper it by combining it with some other
medicine calculated to prevent its disturbing the constitution, if the
patient be too irritable to take mercury ; and, should you find this to
be the case, cease for a while to administer it, improve the general
health, and its employment may be again resumed. I may here ob-
serve to you, that, when a man is in health, mercury will generally
agree with him very well ; but if feeble or irritable, it then often intro-
duces sloughing, and severe constitutional iritation.

The best form in which mercury can be given is that of the blue pill,
ten grains at night and ten in the morning ; ten at night and ten in the
morning is the utmost extent to which the dose should be carried ; in
ordinary cases ten grains at night and five in the morning will be
found quite sufficient : should the mercury produce diarrhoea, a quarter
of a grain of opium should be added to every five grains of the blue pill.
As the compound decoction of sarsaparilla assists the action of the
mercury, half a pint of it may be taken two or three times in the course
of every day, while under the mercurial influence. As to rubbing in
the mercurial ointment, it is seldom done perfectly, and is not often
adopted, except where the internal exhibition of the medicine occasions
so much disorder of the stomach and bowels, that it cannot be intro-
duced into the system any other way. About the time that I commenced
practice (not hospital practice), a woman mentioned a curious circum-
stance to me, which was, that she had been taking mercury, and that it
had occasioned the salivation of her child, without having produced any
obvious effect upon herself. Another curious circumstance is, that no
mercury can be found in the blood or secretions of those who are in a
state of salivation. I sent to Mr. Allen a pint of blood taken from a
salivated person, I also sent him a quart of saliva ejected by a person in
a similar state, and also a quart of urine, with a request that he would
subject them to the most minute chemical analysis, for the purpose of
discovering whether any mercury could be detected in either, yet not
an atom could be discovered ; now you all know that a thousandth part
of a grain of the oxymuriate of mercury might be detected in water or
in blood.

The last circumstance, connected with this subject, to which I shall
call your attention, is the most important of all, and which is this, viz.
— Is any other Medicine hut Mercury capable of curing Syphilis 9 —
Remedy after remedy has been sent forth to the world, as having the



ON SYPHILIS AND THE USE OF MERCURY. 523

power to effect this; and now I will tell you all that I know respecting
the matter. Mr. Rose, late of the Guards, now an eminent surgeon at
the west end of the town, about eight or ten years ago, very laudably
tried numerous interesting experiments for the purpose of attempting to
cure the venereal disease ; also with a view to ascertain what number of
persons would be affected by secondary symptoms if the mercury was
not employed. Mr. Rose found that the primary symptoms of syphilis
could be readily cured without the aid of mercury ; and that out of
every three patients so treated, one was afflicted with syphilitic secondary
y mptoms.

Now, gentlemen, I saw Mr. Rose upon the subject ; he is a very sen-
sible candid man, and upon whose experiments the utmost reliance may
be placed; another surgeon says, that two out of every nine have
secondary symptoms, making one out of every four and a half. I rely,
however, upon the statement made by Mr. Rose. If secondary symp-
toms did present themselves, they were treated without mercury, and
would disappear, would come again, and again disappear. Still, not
being satisfied with this, I said to Mr. Rose, “ Now, sir, if a gentle-
man were to come under your care, what would you do — would you
give him mercury or not ? ” Mr. Rose is not like some men, so wedded
to his system as to have his mind fettered by prejudice, and he with
much sense replied, that he should certainly give the patient mercury ;
and, gentlemen, I advise you to do the same. I will not say that those
persons are dishonest who recommend contrary practice ; but, if they
had seen what I have, I am sure they would still place their reliance in
the use of mercury. Some men are so prejudiced in favour of particu-
lar remedies, that the strongest possible facts which can be brought for-
ward in opposition to their opinions, are not capable of producing the
slightest alteration, or even a transient impression of their error. Now
for a case in point : A gentleman went to a surgeon in the month of
January, showed him a sore upon his penis, and asked him what it
was; “ Why, chancre,” said the surgeon, “ you must take sarsapa-
rilla.” He went to him again in February, telling him that it appeared
again, and, on asking the surgeon what he was to do, the surgeon replied,
“ you must take sarsaparilla.” He repeated his visit in March, stating
that, although his sore had vanished for a time, yet it had again
appeared in the same situation. “ Well,” said the surgeon, “ you
must take sarsaparilla.” In June the patient repeated his visit, having,
at the time, a venereal sore throat, together with a copper-coloured erup-
tion on the skin, and he said to the doctor, “ What am I to do now?”
“ Take sarsaparilla:” the use of which caused the disappearance of
the secondary symptoms; but, in the following August, violent inflam-



t



524 ON SYPHILIS AND THE USE OF MERCURY.

mation made its appearance in both eyes, so that the gentleman was
obliged to be kept in a dark room, to be bled, purged, and kept on the
lowest possible diet ; and, notwithstanding all these precautions, the
virulence of the inflammation endangered the loss of his sight; at
length the inflammation of the eyes having been subdued, in the ensuing
September, a venereal eruption again made its appearance in the skin ;
there were also pains in the bones, aud a sore throat. The gentleman
again visited his doctor, and inquired once more what he must do to rid
himself of his horrible complaints. “ Why,” says the doctor very
gravely, “ you must take sarsaparilla ! ” and, replied the gentleman,

“ I’ll be d d if I do ( excessive laughter ), but I will take advice,”

and shortly afterwards he consulted me. At the time I saw him, he
had severe pains in the limbs and joints, venereal eruptions on the skin,
and an ulcerated throat. He asked me what was his disease, and I at
once told him, confirmed syphilis ; he then detailed to me the history
I have just mentioned to you. “ Well, sir,” said I, “ adhere to the
old Dutch motto, ‘ do right and never look back,’ and give yourself no
uneasiness about the past, as what has happened cannot be prevented.”
I prescribed for him ten grains of blue pill night and morning, and a
quarter of a grain of opium to each pill. About ten or eleven weeks
afterwards he called upon me, and his appearance had undergone so
great a change, that I had entirely forgotten him ; he soon, however,
informed me who he was, and stated that he was completely restored to
health. I mention this case to you, to show you both the folly and the
danger of treating the secondary symptoms of syphilis with any other
remedy than mercury ; and also to point out to' you the dangerous con-
sequences of being prejudiced in favour of a remedy ; which prejudice
the repeatedfailureoftheremedycould not surmount. Now, if you should
unfortunately neglect to give mercury for the removal of primary syphi-
litic symptoms, let me exhort you never to be guilty of a similar neglect
as regards the secondary ; but, the moment they are presented to your
notice, that instant commence exhibiting mercury, if the state of the
patient will permit. All secondary symptoms, I am positive, may be
prevented by a few grains of blue pill, judiciously given. In saying
this, do not let me refuse that tribute which is due to the ability and
candour of Mr. Rose, whose experiments were conducted in a very judi-
cious manner, and their results faithfully and honestly communicated
to the profession. If, then, under the most favourable circumstances,
and under the most judicious management, secondary symptoms will
appear, unless mercury be employed, it is right to withhold that remedy
from those who are afflicted with the venereal disease ? Recollect, gen-
tlemen, who Mr. Rose’s patients were ; they were soldiers under orders.



ON SCROFULA.



525



at the command of their officers ; and, whatever reasonable thing they
were ordered to do, they were obliged to comply with. You cannot
expect your patients to be so circumstanced, nor will you find them
subordinate. Considering all the circumstances, I strenuously and con-
scientiously advise you to adopt that plan which I have so often felt it
my duty to point out to you in the course of this lecture. I have only
one more observation to make, which is, that syphilis should be cured
by a slight, and not by a violent mercurial action ; continue to give it
for the periodsi I have already mentioned ; but do not produce what is
commonly termed salivation ; it would rather prove injurious than
beneficial.

[At the conclusion of this lecture there was loud and continued
cheering.]



LECTURE LXVI.

SCROFULA.

Gentlemen, this appellation, at present used by surgeons, is a
miserable title for the diseases which it is intended to represent ; it is ^
given to a class of diseases springing from debility. If asked what
scrofula is, I should say that, in its character and origin, it is debility ;
that the disease, as it proceeds, becomes inflammatory ; but that it is
connected with original weakness, and derives a peculiar character on
account of its arising from this source. You will find that scrofulous
diseases are inflammatory, that they undergo all the different processes
of inflammation, the adhesive and suppurative processes, ulceration and
gangrene ; but gangrene less frequently than any of the others. These
four processes are thus the effect of scrofulous diseases, but you find
them all imperfectly performed. The adhesive matter secreted in scro-
fulous affections, instead of being firm, consists of a curd-like matter,
easily broken, and very soft ; and this is owing to the blood-vessels not
entering it. The suppuration is not of the common kind ; it contains
curd-like matter, and is not truly purulent ; ulceration is slow in its
progress ; granulations are unequal and slow in forming. These pro-
cesses are the effect of inflammation, but are also connected with debi-
lity ; each is imperfectly performed. But how do scrofulous and com-
mon chronic inflammation differ ? In common chronic inflammation
there is debility, but it is the result of intemperance, or change of consti-
tution ; but, in scrofula, the weakness exists from birth ; it is con-
genital or original debility.

The age at which scrofula manifests itself is during growth ; it is
extremely rare for it to occur after. But common chronic inflammation,



526



ON SCROFULA.



arising from a change of constitution, produced by intemperance, or
any other cause, occurs after growth has stopped, and is much more
easy of cure than scrofulous inflammation. Scrofulous disease depends on
a state of constitution different to that which gives rise to common chronic
inflammation. The one is general, the other is produced in after life.
The character of a scrofulous child is as follows : — You will find the
skin thin if you pinch it, which is quite different from the skin of chil-
dren who are not scrofulous ; in them the skin is solid and dense, and
the fibres strong; but in scrofulous children the skin is thin, and the
vessels may be seen meandering under it ; and it is on this account that
persons with this disease frequently have a rosy colour, arising from the
thinness of the skin which allows the vessels to be seen under it. The
hair is also light-coloured. If you observe in a family of five or six
children, one among them who has a delicate thin skin, light hair, and
complexion, you will find that if they are all exposed to the same
causes, they will escape from any scrofulous affection, with the exception
of the one stamped by nature, and that this, during its growth, will be
affected by the disease. The hair is also extremely fine, the eye-lashes
long, the pupils dilated, and the fingers are what is called clubbed,
similar to the fingers in phthisical persons ; the fingers are extremely
long aud thin, but at the extremities are broad and flat. The upper lip
is of considerable thickness, and this is a mark of debility. Those who
are the subjects of scrofulous diseases often have follicles on different
parts of the body, incrustated with inspissated matter. In scrofulous
persons the absorbent glands and joints are most frequently attacked ;
the absorbent glands, for a reason which I shall hereafter give; and the
joints, from the exercise producing inflammation in the synovial mem-
brane. You know that the absorbent glands of the neck and mesentery
are more liable to scrofula than any others. Various other parts of the
body are also liable to it, the lungs, the brain not unfrequently, the
eyes now and then, the heart, I believe, never; I have never seen an
instance where it was. The secreting glands are rarely affected by
scrofula, at least the liver and kidneys, for the testicle and breast are
exceptions. The testicle is now and then liable to a scrofulous affection,
and we occasionally see a scrofulous tumour in the breast. The se-
creting glands, however, are very rarely subject to this complaint.
Scrofula differs in different constitutions ; it may be of an indolent or
irritable kind, but more frequently of the first than the second. Of this
circumstance you may not yet be aware, but in the course of practice
you will find that an absorbent gland will enlarge, and continue so for
weeks, and often for months, before it suppurates ; and, on the contrary,
that an enlarged gland will be in a most irritable state, and rapidly



ON SCROFULA.



527



proceed to a state of suppuration. This last is by far the worst disease
of the two ; for joint after joint, and various parts of the body become
inflamed, whilst, in indolent habits, the complaint is sometimes confined
to a particular class of parts, and the rest are excluded. This, how-
ever, is a variety.

Influence of Climate and Season on Scrofula — You will find scrofula
considerably influenced by climate, particularly those climates in which
the change from cold to heat, and heat to moisture, are most frequent;
and, on this account, our own island is favourable to the production of
scrofulous disease. The vicissitudes of temperature are so frequent,
that a man is never clothed so as to meet them, and the body is conse-
quently exposed to these sudden and various changes. We find cold
and moist climates giving rise to the difference of scrofulous affections,
although it is found that those who live in countries where they are
exposed to the extremes of heat or cold, are not the subjects of scrofula.
But this disease is arrested by cold and heat, uncombined with a moist
state of the atmosphere, although it previously existed ; and persons
predisposed to scrofula may prevent it from occurring, by a change
to a warm and dry climate. But people from the East or West In-
dies, who come over to this country, not unfrequently fall a prey to
scrofulous disease. Many children, born in the East and West Indies,
are sent to this country to be educated, and therefore we have an oppor-
tunity of seeing the effect of climate on their constitutions; and I can
assure you, that it frequently requires the greatest possible care to save
them from the danger of scrofulous disease of the joints and absorbent
glands ; and very often, with all your care and attention, they will die
of scrofulous disease. Those from the West Indies less frequently die
of scrofula than persons from the East Indies ; but I have seen some
from the South Sea Islands, and most of them have died from scrofu-
lous complaints.

From this statement, then, gentlemen, you see that children born in
warm climates, and subsequently brought to this country to be educated,
frequently perish. Although we have proof of some climates predis-
posing to this complaint, and favouring its production more than others,
yet the most striking effects are manifested by the changes of the
seasons, after scrofula has occurred. Thus, for instance, if a child with
scrofulous disease be examined in the spring, and it has a gland that
is inflamed, the complaint will go on during the spring till the summer
months, when it will be arrested, and the health of the child improved.
In this state it will remain till October and November, and then the
child will become worse. By the alteration of scrofulous complaints,
from the changes of the seasons, a surgeon often loses credit, though he



528



ON SCROFULA.



more frequently gains it. He will lose credit, if called to the child in
winter, because then the state of the child's health will be in an improved
state, compared to what it has been, which state, however, continues
only for a short time, as it becomes worse with the return of spring:
the surgeon will gain credit, if called to a child in the spring, because,
being at that time very unwell, it continues so only till summer, when
it rapidly recovers. In summer the symptoms disappear, in autumn
they return, and continue till the winter, when they again become
suspended. I remember being once called on to subscribe to a charity
instituted for the cure of scrofula, and I said that I had no objection to
subscribe, if its benefits were to be extended throughout the year ;
because, if its operations were to be extended all the year round, the
eyes of the subscribers would be opened to the inefficacy of any charity
of the kind. The way also to try the value of nostrums, blazoned forth
as specifics for the cure of scrofula, is to watch their effscts during the
whole year, for else you may be deceived ; they may occasionally afford
benefit (which I do not mean to deny), but as to any specifics for the
cure of the complaint, I need not tell you that such do not exist.

Well, such are the effects of climate and the changes of the seasons,
on persons born with a debility of constitution, giving rise to inflam-
mation of the scrofulous kind.

The next point to be considered is — Whether Scrofula is hereditary ?
— That scrofula is an hereditary disease, appears as clear to me as can
be, and those who deny it, deny the evidence of their senses. When
speaking of hereditary disease, I do not mean to say that children are
born with an enlargement of an absorbent gland, or a disease of the
joints; but what I state is, that a child will be born with an hereditary
disposition to the complaint. Does a child resemble its father or mother?
and do we not see parents predisposed to scrofulous disease, having
children of constitutions, complexions, &c. as I have described to you,
manifesting the signs of scrofulous affections at some period of their
life ? and this is the consequence of a particular stale of constitution,
transmitted to them by their parents. Let two scrofulous persons marry,
and see the consequence; a great proportion of the children will be born
with a scrofulous disposition ; with that debility of constitution which
gives rise to the production of the disease. I know that children may,
with great care, be preserved from attacks of the disease. A man of a
gouty habit shall have many children, and I would not say that all
should be affected with gout; but will any one say that the children of
such a parent are not more likely to be attacked with this complaint
than the children of persons who never had the complaint ? Vou may
prevent scrofula by care, but that some children are originally predis-



ON SCROFULA.



529



posed to the disease there cannot be the least doubt ; and in such cases
the education and the habits of the youth should be so directed as to
ward off a complaint the effects of which are so frequently fatal. A
gentleman, whom I knew, and who was often the subject of gout, had
three sons : the first child was attacked in early life with the gout; the
second indulged in intemperate habits, and had the complaint to a
severe degree; whilst the third, with extreme care and attention, escaped
from it altogether.

The predisposing cause of scrofula is congenital, or consists in an
original fault of constitution. The exciting causes are whatever tend
to produce, or rather increase, that debility ; such as the fever from
diseases of a specific kind, as measles, scarlet fever, and small-pox.
Scrofulous affections, occurring after small-pox, used to be much more
frequent before the introduction of vaccination than since ; and, if there
were no other advantage attending it than this, it ought to be regarded
as a boon to society. The reasons why small-pox disposes to the ex-
citement of scrofulous inflammation, you must be acquainted with,
without my entering into them at present.

With respect to the state of body in scrofulous children, the blood is
less firm, the crassamentum loosely formed, and coagulating weakly ;
the quantity of serum abundant; and the solids are feebly formed.
When you dissect a scrofulous person, you find extreme attenuation of
the muscles, owing to the fibres being delicately formed, the cellular
tissue then, the heart weak, not at all having the appearance of the
healthy organ ; jou find the arteries with loose coats, and, if you were
to inject them, that the injection would scarcely reach the extremities ;
nor is this surprising, since it happens that the vessels often expand,
and give way, and also that there is blood at the extremities of the
arteries, owing to the great weakness of the vessels ; that they had not
the power of propelling it into the veins as they usually do. The
stomach and intestinal canal are thin and pellucid ; the absorbent
glands are enlarged ; the secretory glands are flaccid, but not diseased ;
and the nervous system sometimes exhibits marks of irritation having
existed in it. This is, as far as we are able to detail, the nature of the
disease- We shall now proceed to speak of its treatment.

Treatment of Scrofula . — The principles on which the treatment of
scrofula should be founded arc three: 1st. To make better blood ; 2d.

1 o strengthen the solids; 3d. To give vigorous action to the circu-
lation.

To one or all of these principles, every mode of treatment should be
referred. The action of the heart and arteries is naturally feeble, the



Z Z



ON SCROFULA.



530

st rum of the blood preponderates, whilst the fibrous portion is deficient
in quantity ; therefore, you must make better blood, strengthen the
solids, or give a vigorous action to the system. The first object is to
make better blood, and without this nothing else will be of avail. I
cannot sufficiently deprecate the system of ordering vegetable food in
scrofulous diseases, and proscribing animal food, which is most nutri-
tious and easy of digestion. Vegetable food is more difficult of digestion
than animal food, and many animals who live on it have more than one
stomach to perform the different processes of digestion ; some have only
one, but then they are abundantly supplied with gastric juice, which is
secreted in greater quantities than in men ; and nature adds to the
digestive powers by setting up another process in the intestines below,
when animals have only one stomach. Vegetable food should not be
given to children labouring under scrofula, as it leads to an aggravation
of the complaint ; but meat should be allowed, prepared so that the
stimulus of the gastric juice, which is weak, may be able to act on it.
The stomach should never be overloaded, or the powers of digestion
will be impaired. Meat should be taken in small quantities and often,
rather than in large quantities and less frequently ; for, when the
stomach is less loaded, digestion goes on much better. Therefore, I
advise that they should breakfast between eight and nine, and take an
egg or a little meat at this meal. They should have a sandwich about
twelve or one o’clock, and meat with their dinner at three. It is right
that they should drink with their dinner, although water is a bad
beverage ; some good beer, or a glass of wine, should be allowed. This
will stimulate the secretion of the gastric juice, and digestion will be
more completely performed than if no stimulus at all had been used.
It is well known that in these complaints the stomach is not supplied
with a sufficient quantity of juice to dissolve the food ; therefore you
must give some slight stimulus to excite the gastric juice. If you
observe the animals around us, which live on animal and vegetable
food, you find that after meals they lap some water, and rest. Rest
appears to be conducive to the performance of the digestive process. An
experiment has been made which confirms this opinion. Two pointers
were fed, each with the same quantity of food ; the one was immediately
put out to hunt, and the other conducted to the kennel, and in two or
three hours afterwards both were killed. The first had not digested the
food he had taken, whilst the other had. Animal food should be given
in larger quantities to persons with scrofulous disease than to those in a
state of health, although the latter do not require the same aid to assist
digestion. In scrofulous children 1 do not like the stomach to be loaded



ON SCROFULA.



531



with milk for breakfast, which considerably impairs the powers of
digestion, and therefore I generally order a little meat or an egg as a
substitute.

Next in importance to nourishment is exercise. Children with scro-
fulous affections, or even those predisposed to them should take a great
deal of exercise in the open air ; more, however, in the way of play than
as a task ; and here I must say, that I am anxious that those concerned
in the education of youth, particularly female instructors, should be ac-
quainted with what I have said on this important subject. I wish them
to know what food and exercise should be allowed to children with a
scrofulous taint, and how much the future happiness of those intrusted
to their care is dependent on an attention to these particulars. At
schools, in general, too little exercise is taken by the scholars. Boys,
however, will have it; but not so with the girls; they are frequently
compelled to sit from morning till night engaged in learning music,
geography, French, Italian, and God knows what else, without paying
the slightest attention to the preservation of their health, and thus im-
pairing constitutions which might have been rendered strong and robust.
It is not my wish to discourage the cultivation of the human mind in
any degree, nor even to prevent the fairer sex from attaining those
accomplishments which so frequently render them the grace, life, and
ornament of society ; but I think it the extreme of folly to compel
children to pass hours over pursuits for which they have no taste, such
as making them learn music when they have no ear ; while their health
is neglected, and their constitutions are ruined, by the confinement to
which they are subjected. The mischiefs thus arising from the false
system of education at present pursued in this country, so frequently
come before my notice, that I wish what I have said to be generally
known, in order that future misery may be prevented, and the physical
education of our youth be better directed. Exercise should not be taken
so as to fatigue the body ; when children feel themselves w r eary, they
should rest a little till they recover. When the state of the weather pre-
vents them from taking exercise in the open air, they should play in a
large airy chamber, and be allowed to dance in the evenings, taking care
that the perspiration excited should not be checked by any improper
means, as is too often done with thoughtless and giddy children ; and,
by this means, they will be brought up with constitutions invigorated, so
as to ward off the attacks of a disease to which they were predisposed. 1
do not exaggerate when I say, that within this last year I have seen five
hundred cases of scrofulous affections ; never a day passes over my head
without my seeing a case, and frequently three or four. This very
day I have seen more; and, if asked how many were boys among



532



ON SCROFULA.



them, I should answer, not one. What is the reason of it? Why, boys
will take exercise, and thus are less liable to the complaint ; whilst girls
are not allowed, and, if predisposed to it, are almost always attacked by it.

The third circumstance to be attended to is air ; without good air all
other means are of no use. Moist and cold weather is the worst. Those
who live in marshy climates are subject to the worst form of scro-
fulous complaint. The state of the atmosphere you should choose is
that in which the air is dry and warm ; a very bleak wind is not desi-
rable. The sea air is generally preferred ; and when the children are
near the sea-side, they should be allowed to play on the beach the
greater part of the day. It is a mistake to suppose that the air of the
coast in the wet and cold seasons is of any advantage to scrofulous
children ; it is only in warm and dry weather that any benefit will be
obtained. Extreme cold suppresses the progress of scrofulous com-
plaints; but, in moist weather, the symptoms return. Unfortunately,
I have experienced in my own family the dreadful ravages of this com-
plaint ; although no one would say that I was a scrofulous subject
(a laugh), I have lost five near relatives of the complaint from which I
have been spared. Whilst at Brighton once, on a professional visit,
I inquired if the number of scrofulous children were as great there as in
other parts, and I found that it was. In the latter part of the spring
and autumn, the sea coast is desirable, but in cold weather it is not.
The bleakness of the air of the sea-shore is unfavourable to the consti-
tutions of children tainted with scrofulous complaints. Air, exercise
and nourishment are ihe three great points to be kept in view in the
treatment of scrofulous affections. But what — you will say — nothing
about medicine ? Gentlemen, you may lay it down as an axiom, that
there is no specific for the cure of scrofula ; and he who says that there
is, attempts to gull mankind by the assertion of what is not true. Me-
dicines, occasionally given with a view to improve the digestive powers,
and regulate the secretions, are good, but attention to the three points
I have just mentioned, are of primary importance. I will mention to you
what are the best ; once a week, or every ten days, two grains of calo-
mel and eight of rhubarb, in order to restore the secretions. This re-
lieves scrofulous inflammation, on the same principle as all other in-
flammations are relieved. A good medicine to be given daily, for a
short time, is the rhubarb and steel ; two grains of rhubarb, and from
three to five of the carbonate of iron. This is a very good tonic. An-
other good tonic consists of two grains of rhubarb, and from four to six
grains of dried subcarbonate of soda, with ten grains of calumba,
which may be taken mixed with sugar, a form that seldom dis-
agrees with the patient. These means will greatly assist the powers



SCROFULOUS GLANDS OF THE NECK. 533



of digestion. One of the remedies which we use in the other hospital
(Guy’s) is infusion of camomile flowers, with a few grains of hydrar-
gyrus cum creta, at bed time ; or the oxymurias hydrargyri, in the pro-
portion of a grain to two ounces of the tincture of bark ; a tea-spoonful
of which should be taken twice a-day in a glass of the camomile infu-
sion. If the bowels are costive, tincture of rhubarb should be substi-
tuted for the tincture of bark. The liquor potass® is a medicine also
used. These different medicines medical men use in different ways ;
those I employ aTe the steel, with rhubarb and calomel, or the subcarbo-
nate of soda with rhubarb and calumba. A great deal of care should be
taken of children originally formed weakly; you should excite no
feverish action on the one hand, nor do any thing to debilitate the con-
stiution on the other. These are the Scylla and Charybdis which we
must avoid ; that of exciting fever on the one hand, and debility on the
other : and recollect, above all, the three principles of treatment which
1 have so often laid down. Children should be well clothed, and never
exposed to changes of temperature. For this purpose they should
wear flannel close to the skin ; and, in this case, it should be worn also
during the night. If the weather be very warm, calico may be substi-
tuted for flannel. The great object is to preserve an equal temperature
of the skin, and not to produce perspiration, because that would debili-
tate. It is right to recommend sea-bathing ; the bath should be taken
about three times a week, at eleven in the morning. The temperature
of the bath should be at 94 deg. ; the person should remain from sixteen
to twenty minutes in it, and walk afterwards. Some children are ex-
ceedingly frightened at the sight of the water at the commencement, and
in those cases it will be advantageous to sprinkle the body over first with
tepid salt water. This will gradually remove the child’s fear of the
water, and prepare the way for the sea-bathing.



LECTURE LXVII.

.Having given you, in the last lecture, a general description of scro-
fula, we shall now proceed to treat of the several parts attacked by
this disease, and, first, of the absorbent glands most commonly
affected.

SCROFULOUS AFFECTION OF THE GLANDS OF THE NECK.

Of the different absorbent glands, those of the neck are most fre-
quently affected with scrofulous disease. Now, when you are consulted

z z 2



534



SCROFULOUS GLANDS OF THE NECK.



in a case of this kind, the symptoms you find are as follow : In the

first place, you learn from the child’s mother, that she at first observed
a swelling in the neck, which was small, hard, not painful, nor in any
way discoloured, but tender to the touch. Thus the inflammatory pro-
cess does not go on to the rapid destruction of the part, for the swelling
will frequently remain in this state of indolence during weeks, months,
and sometimes years. Sometimes, however, owing to accidental circum-
stances, or changes in the weather, or the state of the child's constitu.
tiou, the complaint proceeds with greater rapidity. If the complaint
occurs in a person of an irritable habit, it will advance with rapidity ;
if, on the contrary, the person be of an indolent habit, it will be slow in
its progress. When you examine, by dissection, the state of the parts
affected with scrofulous disease, you find extravasated into the gland a
great quantity of blood, and the blood-vessels enlarged. The interior
of the gland is composed of rather a firm substance, which is of a yel-
lowish-white colour. If you inject the subject first, you will see that
the blood-vessels do not pass into the substance effused, in fact, that the
adhesive matter is not organized. As the vessels do not shoot into this
substance, it does not undergo the same changes as the adhesive matter
thrown out in common chronic disease. In common chronic inflamma-
tion, the adhesive matter effused may be injected, which shows that it
is in some degree organized. Remember, then, that during the adhesive
stage, the inflammation may be increased from change of season, climate,
or any peculiarity of constitution, and proceed to the suppurative. This
disease produces little pus. These are the common symptoms of sup-
puration, but in a much milder degree than are usually met with. The
suppurative process is weak and languid, and it is a long time before
matter forms. The suppuration is very imperfect ; the pus has not the
true character of purulent secretion ; it is composed of a curd-like mat-
ter, and resembles pus mixed with serum. These, then, are the appear-
ances of the suppurative stage. Suppuration proceeds very slowly.
The skin, at first, has a blush of inflammation on it ; then becomes of
a livid or purple hue. It frequently happens that, when the skin is in
this state, a long time elapses before it gives way. When the skin,
however, breaks, it generally separates to a considerable extent. The
reason why scars in the neck are so large is, that the vitality of a large
portion of the skin has been destroyed from the pressure of the pus ; it
* then assumes a livid appearance, and, when it gives way, sloughs to a
considerable extent. The ulcerative process proceeds slowly, compared
with ulceration in other complaints. The interior of a suppurative
gland very rarely sloughs ; but the mattci that is effused separates with



SCROFULOUS GLANDS OF THE NECK.



535



the pus. Such is the history of an enlarged absorbent gland, affected
with scrofulous disease, the various changes which it undergoes, and the
appearances which those changes present in their different stages.

Death is sometimes produced by the enlargement of the absorbent
glands of the neck. I will relate to you three instances which more
particularly strike my mind. In one case, the glands covered the jugu-
lar vein. I attended the case with a respectable practitioner in the city.
The patient had frequent rigors, and a great deal of constitutional irri-
tation ; at the time I saw him his life was evidently in imminent dan-
ger, and in a few days after he died. We found, on dissection, that the
absorbent glands were adhering to the jugular vein, and that the matter
had escaped into it, which was the cause of the great constitutional irri-
tation under which he laboured a short time previous to his death. The
second way in which an enlargement of the glands of the neck may give
rise to death, is by pressure on the veins producing apoplexy. I saw a
case of this kind in a lad of sixteen or seventeen years of age. The
glands were enlarged so as to press on the veins of the neck, and the
boy died apoplectic. — The third case which I shall mention, is one where
an enlarged gland suppurated into the larynx, and produced suffocation.
It occurred in a boy who had received an injury of the head, which was
followed by enlargement of the absorbent glands of the neck. They
went into a suppurative state, and the pus discharged itself into the
trachea, and produced death by suffocation. But it generally happens,
that when these cases terminate fatally, there is also present considerable
disease of the lungs and bronchial glands.

If I were asked why the absorbent glands of the neck are more fre-
quently affected with scrofulous disease than the other glands, I should
answer, that it was owing to their being so much exposed, and, conse-
quently, so much influenced by the changes of weather and seasons.
A child exposed to the cold, with the ears half frozen, the cheeks ami
head also cold, is suddenly brought into a place of excessive heat, which
produces a slight degree of inflammation in the parts ; that irritation
also produces inflammation of the absorbents; and thu3 the reason why
the glands of the neck are so frequently enlarged. Scrofulous enlarge-
ments of the glands of the neck is more frequent than those of the
axilla ; and enlargement of those in the axilla more common than of
the glands of the groin ; because the lower parts are better protected
from atmospheric changes. But it sometimes happens that a peculiar
secretion takes place in the gland, and that earthy matter is diffused in
it. It is not at all an uncommon occurrence for a substance like chalk,
and composed of carbonate of lime, to be deposited in an enlarged gland.
Here is a specimen (exhibiting it to the class) of earthy matter that was



SCROFULOUS GLANDS OF THE NECK.



536

deposited in a gland ; 1 removed it after death. These deposits are
usually composed of carbonate of lime.

Treatment of enlarged Absorbent Glands of the Neck . — When a
child, with a scrofulous enlargement of an absorbent gland of the neck,
is brought to you for advice, you will treat it, if the complaint be of
recent occurrence, like a case of common inflammation. You will give
rhubarb and calomel internally, and recommend evaporating lotions as
local applications. The best lotion you can use i 3 the liquor plumbi
superacetatis, with spirits of wine and water. In this way the inflam-
mation will be gradually subdued. But these glands are apt sometimes,
notwithstanding all the means you employ, and all the care that may
be taken of the child, to go into the suppurative stage. In this case
you must give the rhubarb and carbonate of soda twice a-day, together
with a small quantity of the hydrargyrus cum creta (one grain) three or
four times in the twenty-four hours. You must consider next what local
treatment to employ if the gland suppurates. When you And that there
is a disposition to suppurate, evaporating lotions will not succeed, and
therefore must be discontinued. You should feel if there be any fluc-
tuation : for the moment that there is the slightest blush on the part and
sense of fluctuation, indicating the presence of pus, you should make a
small opening with a lancet, as in a common abscess ; you should not
wait for the skin to assume a livid hue, for then you will never be able
to prevent scars. A scar in the neck of a boy is not of much conse-
quence, but in the neck of a female it is quite a different case. In boys
the neck is covered by the dress ; whereas, in females, it is generally
exposed, and a scar in that part might be the means of destroying the
happiness of the individual whose misfortune it was to have it. Nothing,
gentlemen, is so revolting to the mind, or at least the minds of those
who possess fine feelings and a refined taste, as the appearance of any
thing on the female figure which calls to the recollection that the person
you behold is tainted by a disease of a scrofulous nature; and therefore
it is your duty, if you have any regard for your own reputation and the
happiness of others, to prevent the occurrence of scars on the neck, a
circumstance which may be easily effected. I will tell you why scars
on the neck are so frequently met with : the surgeon waits, too often,
till the skin has become livid, and then makes a puncture. But in this
case he gains nothing by making an opening into the gland ; in fact, if
the skin be of a livid colour, 1 advise you then not to make an opening.
Apply poultices, and let nature effect the opening; for the scar will not
be so great then as if you were to make it. But I seriously advise you
to make a puncture before the skin assumes the appearance I have just
been describing to you. The instrument with which I open these



AFFECTION OF THE MESENTERIC GLANDS. 537



abscesses is a cataract knife, and I make the incision transversely, and
just in the direction of the creases of the neck, so that when the wound
heals, no scar is to be perceived. When the matter is discharged by
the puncture, apply your finger to the side of the swelling, and squeeze
out all the solid matter that may be contained in the gland. If the sac
be not carefully emptied of all the solid matter, this substance will keep
up considerable irritation, and prevent the healing of the wound; there-
fore I wish to press on your attention the necessity of attending to this
point. I have frequently seen serious inconvenience occasioned by its
being neglected. Remember, first, the time at which you are to make
the puncture, and the direction in which it is to be made ; and, secondly,
do not omit, in all these cases, to squeeze out all the solid matter that
may be within the gland. If the wound be indolent afterwards, you
had better inject into it a solution of sulphate of zinc, containing about
a scruple of the zinc to a pint of water. Throw a small quantity of this
into the wound ; it will soon produce healthy granulations, and lessen
the discharge if it be copious. Such, then, gentlemen, is the treatment
to be adopted after the gland has proceeded to the suppurative state.
What I advise you to do is, to make an opening into the gland as soon
as fluctuation can be detected, and before any discoloration of the skin
takes place, in order to prevent a scar hereafter. Thus, you see, by
a little attention, the cause of much unhappiness may be kept off. At
this time you should give rhubarb and carbonate of iron, about two
grains of the former, and five of the latter, twice a-day. The diet
should be nutritious, but not in the slightest degree stimulating. With
respect to the ulcerative process, there is nothing particular to remark :
fomentations, poultices, and the ordinary means, must be had recourse
to. Your object, however, should be to prevent ulceration by the mode
ot treatment 1 have laid down ; and it is only when it cannot be pre-
vented that the latter means are to be employed.

AFFECTION OF THE MESENTERIC GLANDS.

The glands which are affected with scrofulous disease, next in fre-
quency to those of the neck, are the mesenteric glands. In young per-
sons they are most commonly affected at the age of six or eight months.
This complaint is known by the belly being tumid, and from the tender-
ness on pressure ; attenuation of the skin, voraciousness of appetite ;
the limbs of the child, at the same time, wasting. The intestines are
equally irregular, being sometimes purged, at others costive. In the
motions are occasionally observed earthy matter (a specimen of which I
now send you round), composed of carbonate of lime. The causes
which produce enlargement of the mesenteric glands arise from disease



538 AFFECTION OF THE MESENTERIC GLANDS.

of the secreting glands of the intestinal canal ; sucli as irritating food,
which irritates the mouth of the absorbent vessels of the intestines lead-
ing to the mesentery. With respect to the effect of mesenteric diseases,
they consist, at first, in an interruption of the process of absorption.
The chyle travels through the absorbents to the me&enteric glands, and,
when some of these are enlarged, the chyle is interrupted in its course.
Although the child generally eats voraciously, is it wonderful that there
should be such emaciation, independent of the irritation produced by the
system being deprived of nourishment ?

Treatment of Diseased Mesenteric Glands As to the treatment, I

advise you to direct that the child should take animal food, prepared so
that it may be easily digested. Vegetable food is very improper. A
little arrow-root may be taken, and nutritious broths. Animal food
will generally best agree with the child, if it be prepared in the manner
by which it may be most easily digested. The principle on which
you act is, that the child may take the most nutritious food, and
why ? Because, absorption being to a great degree prevented, it is im-
portant that nothing but highly nutritious food should be taken, so that
nutriment may be conveyed to the system. Animal food is more nutri-
tious than vegetable food ; therefore you give it in preference to the last.
To assist the digestive process, it is desirable to give some wine and
water, to stimulate the stomach, to secrete the gastric juice, and to ex-
cite the action of the intestines. In exciting the intestines, you have
a two-fold object in view : stimulating the absorbents, and producing
the peristaltic motion of the intestines. The best medicine in this dis-
ease, with which I am acquainted, is the oxymuriate of mercury, given
in small doses, and in combination with the tincture of bark ; one grain
of the oxymuriate, in two ounces of tincture of bark ; or, should the
bowels be costive, in the same quantity of tincture of rhubarb. The
hydrargyrus cum creta and rhubarb, given so as to produce an aperient
effect, are good medicines. The oxymuriate of mercury should be given
with no other view than to improve the secretion from the liver and in-
testines, and thus produce one stool a-day. The abdomen should be
covered with a stimulating plaster, or frequently rubbed with the hand,
in order to produce a gentle action in the part, and excite the absorb-
ents. This is the treatment of enlarged mesenteric glands.

Dropsy is sometimes connected with this disease. Then paracentesis
should be performed, when the patient generally recovers. Now and
then a mesenteric gland suppurates, opens at the navel, and frequently
communicates with the intestines, and thus an artificial anus is pro-
duced. In these cases, where there is an artificial anus, a large pro-
portion recovers. Poultices should be applied over the opening ; and



SCROFULOUS DISEASES OF JOINTS.



539



when the inflammation is subdued, strips of adhesive plaster should be
applied, so as to bring the edges of the wound together, but not until
you think that all the matter has been discharged from the gland.

DISEASES OF JOINTS.

The diseases of joints vary in their character, according to the stage
of the complaint. It generally happens, that after a child of a strumous
habit has walked a considerable distance, that it complains of pains in
the joints, which is accompanied with stiffness of the joint, and inability
to move it. The patient takes alarm ; and I may say that this disease
can never be too early attended to. The complaint may generally be
removed if it be attacked early : but, if six weeks or two months elapse
before the person applies, he will never recover. A great deal, there-
fore, depends in this complaint, on early treatment. To prevent mis-
chief is infinitely better than to effect a cure, and in these complaints a
cure is not so easily effected. There is little tenderness at first, and
the swelling is very slight. If the synovial membrane be inflamed,
there will be a gritting between the bones under the patella on each
side, and so in different parts, according to the joints affected. The
joint will remain in this state for some time, possess the same appear-
ance as in health, and the constitution suffer little. But where it has
existed a long time, the suppurative process will at last be set up, and
the joints will assume the character common to inflammation of all
joints. When the suppurative process commences, a great quantity of
pus is secreted, if there be much constitutional irritation. Indeed,
there may be at first a copious secretion and slight constitutional de-
rangement ; for the suppurative process is not attended with the same
constitutional effects as in other parts of the body. When the abscess
breaks (which is a long time from the commencement of the disease),
the ulceration is often at a little distance from the joint, and there are
generally sinuses extending from the point of ulceration, for two or
three inches up to the joint ; and thus, in scrofulous enlargements of the
knee, the abscess generally breaks above or below the patella. We
generally let these abscesses open by themselves, as there is little con-
stitutional irritation at first, and the opening cannot be delayed too
long. The abscesses generally open in more parts than one, and the
suppurative process takes place at a distance from the joint; the ulcera-
tive process is slow, and excites little constitutional irritation. 'When
you dissect a joint affected with scrofulous disease, you find, after having
cut through the integuments, that there is a great deal of adeps between
the ligaments and interstices of the skin. Next you will see the cap-
sular ligament thickened, and that the thickening has Taken place on



540



SCROFULOUS DISEASES OF JOINTS.



its interior surface. The synovial membrane will be also found highly
vascular. You now examine the cartilages, when you will find that
they have undergone more or less ulceration, and are covered by pro-
cesses of adhesive matter ; and, lastly, the bones themselves will now
and then be in a state of ulceration : sometimes there are earthy depo-
sits on them ; but they are more frequently lessened in size. With
respect to the nature of the complaint, I believe that it is the result of
exercise, which has produced inflammation of the internal linings of the
joints, and frequently of the synovial membrane. The action of the
joint leads to the inflammation ; for you find that a child, after walking,
taken, as it frequently is, to a distance from its place of residence, and
the parent forgetting that it has to make two or three steps to her one,
and its attention being kept up by the prospect of amusement, I say,
that, in these cases, you will find the child on the following day com-
plaining of pain in the joints. A medical man is consulted, who finds
swelling and signs of inflammation of the joint; inflammation of the
synovial membrane comes on, which leads to the absorption of the car-
tilages, and sometimes bone: for my own part, I believe it is the in-
ternal lining of joints which is originally affected.

Mr. Erodie (whom I am proud to call my friend) has written a work
on diseases of the joints, which cannot be too carefully perused by those
who wish to become acquainted with these affections ; and he is more
disposed than I am to think that the disease commences in the carti-
lages. I am of opinion that the synovial membrane is at first attacked,
and then that the complaint gradually extends to the other parts. It,
however, matters little, for the same treatment is to be pursued whe-
ther the disease originates in the cartilage or the internal lining of the
joint.

Treatment of Scrofulous Affections of the Joints . — The treatment
required in these complaints is as follows : — The great object is to pre-
serve the limb in a state of rest ; this is so obviously necessary for an
inflamed part, that every man will see the reasons for attending to it. If
I bad inflammation of the hand, should I expect that inflammation
would cease unless I kept my limb quiet, and in a state of rest ? And
is it not equally absurd to imagine that an inflammation of the joint will
be subdued unless that joint be kept in a state of perfect rest? I will
not say that the body should altvays be kept at rest, but only the limb
affected. This may be often secured, so that it shall remain quiet,
although the body is in exercise. Next in importance to rest is the
reducing the heat of the part. Evaporating lotions of water and spirits
of wine, or the liquor plumbi supcracetatis dilutus, w’ith spirits of
wine and water, should be employed. Rhubarb, and the submuriate



SCROFULOUS DISEASES OF JOINTS.



541



of mercury ought to be given once a-day, or every second day. Sup-
pose. however, that the disease advances, and is not subdued, it will be
necessary to employ some local counter-irritant. Blisters, tartar emetic
ointment, vinegar poultices, issues and setons, are the various means
used for this purpose. If the joint suppurates, it will be best not to
apply issues or setons close to the joint. Mr. Cline tried once to inves-
tigate this point, and the result of his observation was, that if setons
and blisters were employed, they should be employed at some little
distance from the joint. Blisters may be employed over the joint, but
they should not be so large as to produce considerable irritation : they
should be kept open by the unguentum sabinte. Depend on it this is
the best treatment ; the tartar emetic ointment is a useful irritant, in the
proportion of a drachm of the tartarized antimony to an ounce of sper-
maceti ointment- When the irritation has, by evaporating lotions, and
other means, been lessened, no motion being at all employed, it will be
necessary to put a splint, under the limb, extending from the ham to the
heel, and then to use friction, so that the joint may in time be restored
to use. If no friction or passive motion be employed, there will be no
chance of restoring the limb. This was the advantage of the late Mr.
Grosvenor’s plan, of Oxford. I will not say that friction, when the
inflammation is going on, is not injudicious ; but 1 mean that when the
inflammation is subdued you are not to leave the joint in a state of rest,
but to use friction. Let me put you on your guard with respect to cases
of common inflammation ; in them you may employ motion earlier than
in scrofulous disease. There is such a disposition to a return of these
last affections, that you should never give any pain in the motion you
use ; the exercise should be so employed as not to excite the least un-
easiness in taking it.

The next circumstance to be considered is, when does amputation
become necessary ? Formerly, limbs used to be amputated for scrofu-
lous affections much more frequently than at the present day. The
reason we seldom amputate is, that the affected limb may, with care and
management, be often made more useful than an artificial one. In
enlargements of the knee and ankle, it may be necessary now and then
to amputate ; but it ought never to be done unless the patient is labour-
ing under great constitutional irritation, which threatens destruction to
his life, or the limb has undergone such changes that it is not likely to
be useful hereafter. For instance, in cases of scrofulous affections of
the ankle joint, the foot often remains extended, and the patient is only
able to walk on his toes. Here an artificial foot would be much better
than the natural one. In scrofulous diseases of the knee-joint, the tibia
is often dislocated forwards. You saw a case lately over the way, of

3 A



DISEASES OF THE HIP JOINT.



.042

this description ; the deformity will always remain, and the limb be of
little use. Amputation of the fingers and wrist is occasionally per-
formed ; that of the arm very rarely.



LECTURE LX VII I.

I shall now proceed to speak of diseases of the hip joint, psoas and
lumbar abscess, and vertebral diseases.

DISEASES OF THE HIP JOINT.

Diseases of the hip joint are more liable to be mistaken than scro-
fulous diseases of any other part of the body ; much error prevails with
respect to them. The first circumstance which indicates disease of the
hip joint, is some degree of lameness, and pain in the knee. The mo-
tions of the joint are impeded ; extension is performed with difficulty ;
The child’s knee is bent, and the heel on the diseased side scarcely rests
upon the ground. Besides this incapacity for extension, great difficulty
is experienced in the flexion of the joint. Thus, if you attempt to bend
the knee towards the abdomen, the child shrinks from the touch, and
complains of pain. If you throw something on the floor, and desire
the child to pick it up, you will observe that, in attempting to
get possession of it, it bends only the sound knee. If you say, “ Let
me see you put your foot on the chair the child does this readily
enough with the sound leg, but is incapable of doing it with the other,
in consequence of the confined state of the flexion of the joint. The
rotation of the joint is also impeded : more especially the rotation in-
wards, which cannot be attempted without great pain and uneasiness.
There is apparently a difference in the length of the limb ; the unsound
limb at first appears longer than the other. It is possible that an
effusion into the head of the joint may push down the limb a little, but
I doubt whether this has any influence in producing an elongated ap-
pearance of the limb. The length of the limb is not really increased,
but an appearance of elongation is produced by the parietes being de-
pressed on the diseased side ; if you draw a line from the spinous pro-
cess of the ilium from one side to the other, you will find the difference
of an inch. After a short time, indeed, a considerable reduction takes
place in the length of the limb, the reason for which you will imme-
diately see.

When you endeavour to ascertain whether disease of the hip joint
exists or not, you should first place the patient on his back, and exa-
mine whether the sides of the pelvis arc equal ; the pelvis will be lower



DISEASES OF THE HIP JOINT.



543



on the diseased side. Having placed the patient in the recumbent
posture, you will then bend the knee towards the abdomen, which, if
there be disease of the hip joint, will occasion considerable pain. In
rotating the joint also, much pain will be excited in consequence of its
stiffened state. You will then turn the patient on his face, and observe
whether the nates are lower on one side than on the other : there is ge-
nerally a difference of an inch or more on the diseased side. These are
the common characters of this disease. On dissection you find the fol-
lowing circumstances : — In the first place, a quantity of adhesive matter
is poured out about the joint ; the ligaments are much thickened ; the
synovial surface is inflamed, and often slightly ulcerated ; the cartilages
of the joint are ulcerated ; and, lastly, the bone itself is sometimes
absorbed — not only the head of the bone which enters the acetabulum,
but the acetabulum itself. You will find examples of all these appear-
ances in the preparations on the table ; there is one in which the head
of the bone has been absorbed from ulceration, and another in which
the cavity of the acetabulum has undergone a remarkable alteration,
the upper part of it having been absorbed. Abscesses are frequently
formed in diseases of the hip joint, which take different directions ; in
general, their course is down the thigh, between the trochanters and the
outer surface of the thigh, where they break. Sometimes they occur in
the upper part of the thigh ; there is an example in the collection, in
which an abscess occurred in the direction of the femoral artery ; and,
by its pressure, occasioned the absorption of a considerable portion of
the vessel itself. Sometimes the abscess breaks into the rectum ; there
is an example of this in a preparation on the table, where you will per-
ceive the rectum very considerably enlarged at the place into which
the abscess has broken. Abscesses sometimes take their course into
the vagina, from whence the matter is discharged; an instance of
this kind occurred recently in a child of eleven years of age. It will be
right, therefore, to mention to the friends of the patient, that there is
great variety as to the course which abscesses take in this disease.

The cause of this disease is, in general, too much exertion ; too long
a walk, for instance, for the strength of the patient, which produces
inflammation of the synovial surface.

Treatment of Diseases of the ITip Joint . — With respect to the
treatment of this disease, you will observe, during the inflammatory
stages, the same plan which I have recommended to you in the treat-
ment of scrofulous complaints. It may be observed, generally, that if
you do not cure a case of diseased hip joint in a few weeks, from six to
ten weeks, for instance, you will not succeed at all. In the first place,
the recumbent posture, and as much rest as possible, should be strictly



544



ON VERTEBRAL DISEASES.



enjoined. If there is much pain, leeches should be applied; evaporating
lotions should also be employed in the first few days. If you do not
find the inflammation yield in a few days, it will be right to put a large
blister over the part, and to keep it open with the unguentum sabiuse
for a considerable length of time. The surface kept open with the savine
ointment should not exceed the size of a crown piece, as you might
otherwise produce too much irritation, and do more hamv-than good.
Issues and setons are more applied here than in other diseases of the
joints. It is better to regulate the degree of irritation in this way, than
to endeavour to produce effects by violent means, which, by exciting
fever, might only be adding fuel to the flame. With respect to the
treatment of abscesses, it is right in all diseases of joints, and especially
in diseases of the hip joint, to postpone the opening of them as long as
you can ; unless the abscess is exceedingly large, it is best not to open
it at all. The reason of this is, that if you open the abscess early, you
expose the cavity of the joint to irritation ; whereas, if you delay the
opening of it, you suffer the abscess to make its passage to a consider,
able distance from the joint, so that the opening of it will not be liable
to excite much irritation in the cavity of the joint. The irritation will
be very slight if you delay the opening, but, if you make it early, the
effect will be just the same as if you were to make an incision into the
joint. Give time for nature to perform her task, and to fill the joint
itself with adhesive matter, as the abscess extends down the limb to a
great distance from the joint. I have made up my mind most decidedly
on this point, having again and again had an opportunity of contrasting
both modes of practice. When the disease is protracted, it would be
cruel and injurious to the child to keep it in a state of perfect rest, and
it should therefore be allowed to use a crutch. This will prevent the
derangement of the general health, and the depression of mind which
arises from long confinement. If the disease has continued for any
length of time, it is not to be expected but that some lameness will
remain.

OF VERTEBRAL DISEASES.

A disease, similar to the disease in the joints occasionally occurs in
the spine, sometimes beginning in the vertebral substance, sometimes
in the bone itself. The disease of the vertebral substance has been
accurately described by Mr. Pott, and I recommend you to consult his
pamphlet, which contains a very admirable history of this disease. It
is manifested in the following manner: — The child complains of a
fixed pain in the spine ; the pain, however, is not confined to the spine,
but it extends down on each side, in the direction of the nerves, arising
from the spinal marrow. There are weakness and pain in the back ;



ON VERTEBRAL DISEASES.



545



pain on the sides, more on one side than on the other ; and the nerves
arising from the spinal marrow are inflamed in consequence of the
pressure on the membrane of the spinal marrow. After a little time,
there is a projection of the spine backwards, one, two, or three, of the
spinous processes projecting more than the others. It usually happens,
that the lower extremities become affected ; sensibility is diminished,
and the muscles lose a portion of their voluntary power. Thus, a child
affected with this disease, is in the constant habit of falling, in conse-
quence of a want of due power in the muscles. There is this difference
between paralysis and the effect on the lower extremities from this
disease, that, in the former case, all action of the muscles is suspended ;
in the latter, there is diminished power and spasmodic contraction of
the muscles. The patient sits with his legs drawn under him, and his
heels towards the nates ; and there are, besides, spasmodic twitchings
of the limbs. If the lumbar or dorsal vertebrae, be affected, there will
be difficulty in discharging the urine, and the faeces will at length pass
off involuntarily. When the disease is in the neck, the head is the only
part of the body, except the vital organs, which retains its power;
volition is lost in all the parts of the body below the seat of the disease,
and the patient is reduced to the most abject state of helplessness. The
disease of the spine is very apt to produce abscesses, in the form of
psoas and lumbar abscesses. These abscesses frequently occasion a very
considerable loss of substance, as you will have an opportunity of ob-
serving in the preparations which I shall send round. On dissection,
the vertebrae are found to be sometimes wholly, and sometimes in part,
absorbed ; occasionally, four, five, or more vertebras are absorbed ; there
is a specimen in the college, in which four vertebrae are wholly, and
two are partially, absorbed. This absorption is the effect of pressure
on the spinal canal. A curious change takes place, after a time, in the
spinal canal, which is, that, instead of being smaller, it is larger opposite
the part in which the vertebrae have given way.

In cases where a cure has been effected, the spinal canal is larger
opposite the part where the vertebras have been absorbed, than it is
above or below the diseased part. The mode in which the disease
becomes cured, is by the upper portions of the vertebrae falling on the
lower, and in this way anchylosing. This is not matter of conjecture ;
there are three specimens on the table, in which you will see the upper
part of the spine bent forwards, so as to meet the lower vertebra;, and
in this way producing anchylosis. This must be your object in the
treatment of this disease. You should keep the spine of the child as
much as possible at rest ; with this view the child should be kept as
steadily as possible in the recumbent posture, so that the vertebra; may

3 a 2



546 ON PSOAS AND LUMBAR ABSCESSES.

be suffered to fall into contact, and by coalescing effect anchylosis. If
you attempt to keep the spine straight, you will defeat the object of
nature ; do not keep the patient in a directly straight line, but rather
assist nature in producing the union of the vertebrae. Great attention
should be paid to the general health of the child ; it should have the
best of nourishment, taking care to avoid any thing which may produce
feverish excitement ; likewise airings in a carriage, care being taken
that the body should not be shaken. If the child cannot be kept at
rest ; if the parents are unable, or refuse to observe these instructions,
the next best treatment will be to apply one of Callow’s backs, which
is worn upon the spine, and fixed round the pelvis and shoulders. As
to avoiding deformity, that is out of the question ; in all these cases,
deformity is inevitable; whatever you do, this cannot be prevented.
The words which now fall from my lips you may recollect at some
future period, when you may be called to a case of this kind ; and I
now tell you that I have never met with an example in which the spine,
under these circumstances, has been exactly restored to its natural state.
All that you can do is to assist or rather not to oppose, the process of
nature, in producing anchylosis. Blisters, setons and issues, are com-
monly employed, but they frequently do more harm than good, by the
irritation which they excite in the constitution ; the means on which
you should chiefly rely, are rest, and the recumbent posture. The part
of the spine affected is of no importance with respect to the cure ;
whether it be the neck, back, or loins, there will be no difference as to
the treatment, except in the form of the mechanical means which may
be employed. The next diseases to which I shall call your attention
are

PSOAS AND LUMBAR ABSCESSES.

With respect to these diseases, I shall point out to you the nature of
their treatment very shortly. Disease of the ligaments of the spine
commences between the ligaments and the surface of the intervertebral
substance. It is very often nothing more than an abscess, from the
disease which I have just spoken of, having its origin in inflammation
of the spine, and the intervertebral substance. The matter spreads till
it reaches the origin of the psoas muscle, which passes into ulceration,
and forms a bag, surrounded by a complete ring. The abscess proceeds
as far as the tendon of the muscle, by Poupart’s ligament, and its fur-
ther progress is restrained by the tendon ; when it passes under Pou-
part’s ligament, between the femoral vein and the symphysis pubis, it
has generally attained considerable magnitude, and has the appearance
of femoral hernia. You may know this abscess, by the following
marks : in the first place, when you ask the patient whether he has for



ON PSOAS AND LUMBAR ABSCESSES. 547



a long time had continued pains in the loins ; if he has psoas abscess,
he will reply, “ Yes, four, five, or six months ; ” you will find that he
has a difficulty in extending the thigh ; if he puts his legs together, he
feels pain and tightness in the groin, and he has increased pain in
attempting to exert the limb, in consequence of the psoas muscle being
then on the stretch. An excellent case of psoas abscess, in which the
symptoms were particularly well marked, occurred in the other hospital
a few days ago. This disease has the same seat as femoral hernia, and
is, therefore, liable to be confounded with it ; the marks which chiefly
distinguish it from femoral hernia, are the pain in the loins, and the
very great constitutional disturbance which the patient suffers in the pro-
gress of the disease. If the abscess forms on the side of the vertebrae, in-
stead of the fore part, it is termed lumbar abscess, instead of psoas. So
much for the nature of psoas and lumbar abscess ; with respect to the
treatment, you must allow the abscess to take its course ; very little can
be done in this disease, until it has acquired considerable magnitude.
The use of issues is sometimes recommended in these cases. Little can
be done, however, to prevent its progress when it is once formed, and I
do not know that any advantage is to be derived from counter-irritation.
Digitalis has been given, with a view of promoting absorption, but I
have not known it in any instance succeed. Mr. Cline, senior, once
gave it to a very considerable extent, to a boy fourteen or fifteen years
old ; the abscess diminished for a little time, but when the digitalis was
given up, in consequence of its influence on the general health, the
disease returned. Let the abscess proceed until you observe a redness
or blush of the skin, and then adopt Mr. Abernethy’s plan of making
a valvular opening into the part, so as to discharge the matter, and close
the wound almost immediately. The danger does not arise from the
quantity of matter accumulated, but from the irritation produced by the
attempts of nature to close the abscess, and fill the cavity by the process
of adhesion. Four days after the abscess is opened, violent symptoms
of constitutional irritation are apt to come on, such as great depression
of strength, loss of appetite, and the patient is soon reduced to tie
lowest extremity. It is extremely desirable to prevent the occurrence of
these symptoms ; and the plan of Mr. Abernethy is the best that has
ever been suggested by any surgeon, with a view of preventing them.
You are to make the opening obliquely, apply a bandage, which is fas-
tened round the abdomen, and endeavour to bring the sides of the
abscess as close together as possible, in order to promote the process of
adhesion. If ulceration should take place, the matter will be in this way
discharged, and all you can do is to support the eftbrts of nature. I have
frequently seen patients recover from this disease. I advise you to use



548



ON KACHITIS.



all the means which I recommended in the first lecture on Scrofula, for
the purpose of improving the general health of the patient. A consi-
derable degree of rest should be enjoined ; all exercise is injurious in
this disease. Blisters are sometimes placed on the spine, and issues
opposite the seat of the disease, but I am not sure that external irrita-
tion is of any considerable advantage. I have, however, seen benefit
from injecting the abscess ; the injection usually employed is the sul-
phate of zinc, or alumen. It promotes the adhesive process in the
interior of the abscess, glues its sides together, and lessens the purulent
secretion.

RACHITIS.

I shall conclude this lecture with a few observations on the disease
produced by debility of the vascular system, which is commonly called
rickets. It first manifests itself in disease of the mesenteric glands ; the
abdomen is increased in size, the head is considerably enlarged, and out
of proportion to the rest of the body, so that the disease is often mis-
taken for hydrocephalus. This arises from the softened state of the
bones, which are incapable of supporting the action of the arteries of the
brain, and the head and forehead are consequently expanded. The chin
is expanded, the sides of the jaws are brought together, and the whole
of the features are altered, so that, in general, by merely looking at the
face of the patient, you may infer from it the state of the spine, and
other parts of the body. An alteration takes place in the form of the
spine, which has a double curvature, above and below, like the italic S.
Nature endeavours still to preserve the perpendicular line of the body,
by producing a second curvature as soon as one begins, and the equili-
brium is maintained, though there is a considerable variation in the
form of the spine. The scapula is also considerably projected. A parent
will come to you and say, “lam very uneasy about my child’s shoul-
der, it is growing out.” You will judge from this alteration in the
shoulder, that there is some alteration in the form of the spine and ribs.
Pressure on the shoulder, therefore, with a view of remedying this de-
fect, is a most absurd and unscientific practice; it may give pain, but
can do no possible good. The spine, in these cases, has given way in
two directions, and the ribs on one side are more curved than on the
other. This incurvation of the ribs occasions the alteration in the form
of the scapula. The anterior part of the chest is extremely projected;
the sternum is sometimes sunk between the cartilages of the ribs, and
sometimes advances so as to form what is called a chicken breast.
The os humeri, the radius and ulna, the femur, and the tibia, all un-
dergo an additional curvature. Absorption of some of the bones at
length takes place, and nothing but the cartilage remains. When you



ON RACHITIS.



549



feel the os humeri of a child under this disease, it seems as if it had had
a fall, and the bone had been fractured ; the ossific matter is absorbed,
and nothing but cartilage remains. The same appearance is frequently
observed in the femur and knee-joints of children in the low alleys of
this town, who are deprived of healthy or proper nourishment, and get
scarcely any thing, perhaps, but a little gin, which their mothers give
them by way of comfort, though they give them nothing to eat. These
are the miserable changes to which rickety patients are subject. The
cause of all this is a great deficiency in the powers of the circulation, in
consequence of which the bones lose their phosphate of lime, and be-
come spongy at the extremities, and the joints, therefore, are exceed-
ingly enlarged. The ossific matter binds down the cartilages, so as
to prevent their expansion, hence arises a diminution of the ossific
deposit, which leads to the alteration in the form of the bones. With
respect to the treatment of these cases, you will observe the same gene-
ral principles which I laid down in the first lecture on scrofula, and you
will also resort to mechanical means. For the enlargement of the head
it will be right to use some sort of pressure ; a cap or a roller round the
head may be worn, for the purpose of preventing the growth of
the head, by the pressure of the arteries of the brain. The next
point is to prevent the curvature of the spine, and for that pur-
pose, it ha3 been the practice to keep children in the recumbent
posture for a great length of time. This is a plan which I by no
means advise ; exercise is absolutely necessary to the health of chil-
dren, and I am glad to find that a respectable gentleman at the
west end of the town, and a gentleman at Bath, have adopted more
rational principles in the treatment of this disease. The cause of this
disease is debility, and deficiency in the circulation : how is it pos-
sible then to give vigour to the circulation, if the child is kept in a con-
fined atmosphere, and prevented from taking exercise, and participating
in those amusements which are so essential to health ? Exercise should
be freely allowed, taking care only that it be not protracted so. as to
occasion fatigue. How, it may be a3ked, can 5'ou allow exercise, and
at the same time bring the spine into a straight position ? By giving
artificial support to the spine. This may be effected by two springs of
steel added to stays, one on each side of the spine, which may be worn
by the patient in any position. Callow’s back is a good mechanical
contrivance; it fits to the back of the patient, and is passed round the
pelvis without pressing on the sides — the pressure is on the crista of the
ilium, and not on the sides. In the use of mechanical means, the great
object should be, not to force the child into a constrained position, but
merely to prevent inclination on one side or the other. I have known



550



ON RACHITIS.



children laid down for a length of time, to the great injury of their general
health, without producing any effect on the distortion. A lady, of great
talent and great resolution, lay for twelve months in the recumbent
posture, and rose with her spine in the same state, but with an addi-
tional disease in the bladder. The urine was loaded with an immense
quantity of mucus, her natural delicacy having restrained her from mak-
ing water as often as she had occasion. This was followed by a disease
of the womb, which proved fatal. I have read a book lately with
great pleasure, or, rather, I have looked through it, for I cannot say
that I very often read a book, in which the author recommends a par-
ticular mode of exercise, with a view of bringing certain muscles of
the body into action, so as to oppose resistance where there is any
deviation from the natural form. The plan is founded on sound and
rational principles, and is well calculated to have the effect of opening
the chest, keeping the shoulders well back, and bringing the spine
into its natural position. In rickety affections of the knees, horse exer-
cise is of great advantage ; if the patient is very young, he may be
allowed to ride the rocking-horse as long as he likes. The position on
horseback throws the knees outwards, while the exercise is beneficial to
the general health of the patient.

I shall detain you, gentlemen, a few moments longer on my own affairs,
and those of my colleagues. Their feelings have been hurt by the ob-
servations which I made on the abuse of mercury, in the treatment of
patients for gonorrhoea in these hospitals. Those observations having
been made for many years in these lectures, are not applicable to them.
Who are the men, gentlemen, against whom it has been supposed that
these observations were directed ? Are they men whom I could possi-
bly feel disposed to injure ? Mr. Travers was my apprentice, Mr.
Green is my godson, Mr. Tyrrell is my nephew, Mr. Key is my
nephew, Mr. Morgan was my apprentice. I feel proud in having such
men around me, and I believe at no former period has the surgical de-
partment of these hospitals been so well filled as it is by them. I do not
wish to be understood as disparaging the abilities of former surgeons,
but what I do say is, that there have never, at any one time, been so
many persons officiating as surgeons to these hospitals who have been
so properly educated to the profession. It is my wish to uphold the
profession, and it is because I wish to uphold it that I wish its abuses
to be corrected. I believe much good has already resulted from my
observations on the abuse of mercury, it is not my intention to retract
my opinions ; and I am happy in being able to state that the present
surgeons of St. Thomas’s and Guy's have never pursued the system of
treatment which I deprecated in the lecture on gonorrhoea, and that the



ON DISLOCATIONS.



551



venereal wards of Guy’s are about to be opened within a week under
new and improved regulations ! I have spoken to the gentleman who
rules over that hospital, and I have the satisfaction of stating, that
making patients spit three half-pints a day will no longer be a part
of the system, but that the venereal wards will be within a week opened
under new and improved auspices. I trust that harmony and unani-
mity will ever be preserved among the members of the profession, which
are essential for their mutual advantage, and the advantage of the
public ; and it shall not be my fault if that harmony is ever disturbed.



LECTURE LXIX.

ON DISLOCATIONS.

Gentlemen, before considering the particular dislocations, I shall
make some general remarks on these accidents.

A dislocation is the removal of the articulating portion of a bone
from that surface to which it is naturally connected. A limb, when
dislocated, is generally rendered shorter than before ; but there are two
dislocations in which the limb is lengthened, as in the dislocation of the
femur into the foramen ovale, and the dislocation of the humerus into
the axilla. The axis of the limb is altered, and it becomes unnaturally
fixed. In the first moments, however, of the dislocation, considerable
motion remains, and the position is not so determinately fixed as it
afterwards becomes. The motion of the joint is lost, flexion and ex-
tension are slightly allowed, but rotation is completely prevented. There
is a dull confused sensation in the part ; but if the head of the hume-
rous be thrown into the axilla, the pain is very severe, and sen-
sation is lost in the fingers, from the pressure on the axillary
plexus; If the head of the femur be thrown into the ischiatic
notch, the pressure of the bone on the nerves there occasions great pain
and numbness of the lower extremity. There is a slight crepitation
when dislocations have only occurred for a day or two, which is owing
to the escape of synovia from the joint into the surrounding cellular
membrane ; this becomes thickened by the absorption of the more fluid
part, and crackles under motion ; a circumstance which every prac-
titioner should be aware of, as this is often mistaken for fracture ; but it
does not give that peculiar grating feel which the extremities of the
fractured bones produce. There is very great swelling produced by the
extravasation of blood into the cellular tissue, but the tension arises
secondly from inflammation. In the early days of the accident these



552



ON DISLOCATIONS.



circumstances render it difficult to decide on the absolute nature of the
injury ; and the difficulty is increased exactly in proportion to the
time that has been allowed to elapse after the accident. When, there-
fore, the swelling has subsided, the muscles are wasted, and the mo-
tions of the limb impeded in a particular direction, and the head of the
bone can be distinctly felt : it would be both illiberal and unjust to
throw out any insinuations tending to the prejudice of an individual
who might have given a different opinion under circumstances so much
more unfavourable for forming a correct conclusion. The blood-ves-
sels sometimes sustain great injury in dislocation. In a case, where
the dislocation of the clavicle, at its sternal end, occurred backwards,
the subclavian artery was so much injured that the pulsation at the
wrist was stopped, and the circulation carried on by the anastomosing
vessels. In another case also, the brachial artery suffered so much that
it was necessary to tie the subclavian. On dissection of those who die
from dislocations arising from violence, it is found that the capsular
ligament is torn transversely to a great extent, and the peculiar liga-
ments of the joint are ruptured. In dislocation of the hip, the liga-
mentum teres, I believe, is always ruptured ; frequently a piece of the
cartilage is separated with it, and sometimes even portions of the bone.
In dislocations of the os humeri, the tendon of the biceps remains unin-
jured, in the cases which I have hitherto seen ; but the muscles and
tendons connected to the joint are very much injured, especially the
subscapularis.

Whenever the thigh-bone is dislocated into the foramen ovale, the
fibres of the pectinalis are torn, and those of the adductor are very much
injured. There is generally great extravasation, and sometimes matter
forms in four or five days. But the most curious cases are those in
which the nature of the accident has not been detected. The head of
the bone becomes much altered in figure, and this alteration is very
much influenced by the structure on which it presses, whether on the
bone or on muscles. Changes likewise take place in the soft parts,
new capsular ligaments of condensed cellular tissue are formed by the
pressure ; the tendons of the muscles, which were torn through, become
united, and the muscles accommodate themselves to their new axis,
and the limb is thus newly, yet permanently, established. This account
shows the folly of attempting to reduce a dislocation, after a long time
has elapsed. Even in one case, where the dislocation of the humerus
had only existed six weeks, the fibres and tendons of the subscapu-
laris and teres minor were torn through in attempting to reduce it, and
caused the death of the patient.

Although dislocations generally arise from violence, and are accom-



ON DISLOCATIONS.



553



panied by laceration of the ligaments of .the joint, yet they sometimes
happen from relaxation of the ligaments only. This is especially likely
to occur where there has been an abundance of synovia secreted, which
must have the effect of distending the capsule, thereby weakening the
articulation. The patella is sometimes dislocated from this cause. If
muscles are put and kept long upon the stretch, their power of contrac-
tion is in a great measure lost ; or, if from paralysis, they lose their
action, a bone may be easily dislocated and reduced as quickly. A per-
son had his arm kept powerfully upon the stretch for an hour, by way
of punishment, whilst on board a ship in the East Indies, and he could
luxate and reduce his shoulder at pleasure. Dislocations frequently
arise from ulcerations of the joints, by which the ligaments are detached,
and the bones become altered in their relation to each other — this fre-
quently happens in the hip. There is a preparation in the museum, of
the knee dislocated by ulceration, and anchylosed at right angles with
the femur. Dislocations are sometimes accompanied with fracture. At
the ankle joint a dislocation seldom occurs without fracture of the
fibula. Sometimes the acetabulum is broken in dislocations of the hip
joint. When a bone is both fractured and dislocated, it is best to reduce
the dislocation without loss of time, taking care that the fractured part
be strongly bandaged in splints, to prevent any injury being done to the
muscles; for, if this be not done at first, it cannot afterwards, without,
in all probability, disuniting the fracture. Dislocations are sometimes
partial, at other times complete. The ankle is often partially dislo-
cated, resting partly on the astragalus, and in part on the os navicu-
lare. The os humeri is sometimes thrown forward against the coracoid
process, resting on the edge of the glenoid cavity. Young persons, and
persons advanced in life, have more frequently fractures than disloca-
tions. I have known a dislocation of the hip joint occur in a child nine
years old ; but these accidents are very rare ; what are generally de-
scribed as cases of dislocation arise usually from ulceration, as I
explained to you when speaking of disease in the hip joint. A com-
pound dislocation is that in which the articulating surfaces are not only
displaced, but in which there is also a division of the integuments and
capsular ligament, by which the cavity of the joint is laid open. It is
generally attended with great danger from the inflammation of tltf
lacerated ligament and synovial membrane, which speedily succeeds ;
this is soon followed by suppuration, and granulations arise from the
surface of the secreting membrane. But I should say that it was a very
serious injury, or otherwise according to the treatment which it receives.

It was the practice formerly to poultice, but this is now laid aside, as it
produced a train of bad symptoms, and seldom terminated favourably.

3 it



554



ON DISLOCATIONS.



After reducing the dislocation, bring the integuments closely together
by adhesive plasters, and let the joint remain undisturbed for several
days, and it is probable that adhesion will take place. If there should
be great difficulty in reducing the dislocation, as, for example, in the
ankle, it is better to saw off the protruded portion of bone, especially
when there is great spasmodic action of the muscles ; the bone after-
wards granulates, and, if passive motion be used in proper time, a very
useful joint may be restored. The elbow is not likely to do so well in
this case as the ankle ; but I shall say more on this subject when I am
speaking of the particular dislocations.

The difficulty in reducing a dislocation is in proportion to the time
which has been allowed to elapse after the accident. In recent cases, it
is easily effected, but if it has happened a few days, or at most a few
weeks, it is reduced with great difficulty. Still, however, difficulties
arise from other causes, which I shall presently mention. If the mus-
cular power be very great, the exertion necessary to reduce the disloca-
tion must be very great also. In such a person the reduction of the
humerus ought never to be attempted after three months ; but, if the
patient be less muscular, four months should be the utmost limit. In
the dislocation of the thigh, two months may be fixed on as the time,
beyond which it would be wrong to make any attempt, except in a per-
son of very relaxed fibre, when a little more time may be allowed. In
those cases where it has been said the dislocations have been reduced a
long time after the accident, the patient has never been able to use the
joint extensively. Difficulties likewise arise from the head of the bone
catching against the articulating cavity, as in the dislocation of the
thigh bone into the foramen ovale, and ischiatic notch, where it is neces-
sary to raise the head before it can be returned, or where the head of
the bone is larger than its cervix, as in dislocations of the radius, it was
thought that the opening in the capsular ligament was too small, and
therefore impeded the return of the bone ; but such persons must have
forgotten that the ligaments are inelastic, and as the opening in it was
sufficiently large to allow the head of the bone to pass out, so it must
also allow it to be returned through the same aperture. The peculiar
ligaments of joints sometimes prevent the reduction of dislocations, as
in the knee, where the bone should be moved in such a direction as to
relieve that ligament which remains entire. The ligaments of the ankle
joint are of extraordinary strength, and the bones of this joint will often
rather break than their ligaments give way. The muscles form the
principal obstacle to the reduction ; the rigid involuntary contraction of
the muscles is immense, and this power is proportioned to the length of
time which has elapsed after the injury ; it continues sometimes even



ON DISLOCATIONS.



555



after death. This power is to be overcome by general relaxation being
effected by constitutional remedies, and by gentle but continued force.
Hence the great advantage of considering the power and direction of
the larger muscles previous to making any attempts at reduction. The
most powerful mechanical means would fail, unaided by constitutional
remedies. The constitutional means to be employed for the purpose of re-
duction, are those which produce a tendency to syncope, and this neces-
sary state may be best induced by one or other of the following means : by
nausea, bleeding, or the warm bath. Of these I consider bleeding as the
most powerful ; but in recent cases it is not required. That the effect
may be produced as quickly as possible, the blood should be drawn from a
large orifice, and the patient kept in the erect position ; for by this mode
of depletion syncope is produced before so large a quantity of blood as
might injure the patient is lost. Where the warm bath is thought pre-
ferable, it should be employed at the temperature of 100 to 110, and, as
the object is to produce fainting, he should be kept in it till this is
effected, then immediately wrapt in a blanket, and the mechanical power
applied. It may also be accomplished by giving nauseating doses of tar-
tarized antimony, as a quarter or half of a grain every five minutes; and
a good proof of the effect of nausea is, the man’s being unable to lift his
hand on a level with his shoulder. As its action is rather uncertain, it is
better to use it, with a view of keeping up the nausea first produced by the
two preceding measures. Another mode of relaxing the muscular power
is, by making the patient support a weight with the dislocated arm. The
reduction of the bone is to be attempted, after lessening the power of the
muscles, by fixing one bone and drawing the other towards its socket.
The force should be gradually applied, and it is in this way only that
that state of the fatigue and relaxation is produced which is sure to
follow continued extension, and not attempt at once to overpower the
action of the muscles. Great attention should be paid to the fixing of
that bone in which the socket is placed. If, for example, in attempting
to reduce a dislocation of the shoulder, the scapula be held by one per-
son, and two pull at the arm, the scapula is necessarily drawn with the
humerus, and the extension is very imperfectly made. The most effec-
tual mode of tiring the myscular power is by the pullies, which have
this advantage over extension made by assistants, that your force is
gentle and continued , and may be gradually increased, whereas, the
exertions of assistants are sudden, violent, and often ill-directed, and
such force is more likely to produce a tearing of the parts, than to restore
the bone to its former situation. First pass a wetted roller round the
limb, and over this buckle on the leather with the rings to which the
pullies are to be fixed. Having fixed them on, draw the cord very



DISLOCATIONS OF THE SPINE.



55 0

gently, until you feel the muscles making some resistance, then rest two or
three minutes, and extend again ; and so on, until you see the muscles be-
ginning to quiver, and by a little further extension they will be overcome,
and the bone easily slips into the socket. Sometimes the bone goes into
the joint without producing any noise, therefore care should be taken
that the extension be not kept up too long. It is not necessary, in recent
dislocations, to use pullies, excepting those of the thigh, in which they
should always be used ; and they should be used also in dislocations
of the shoulder, which have remained long unreduced. The best place
to fix the pullies is on the bone to be reduced. The part from which the
bone was dislocated must be well secured, as without the aid of ban-
dages the bone will not rtemain in its situation until the muscles sur-
rounding the joint recover their action. After the reduction, rest is
necessary for some time, to allow the ruptured ligaments to unite,
which would be prevented by exercise. Rest is the principal thing to
be attended to ; and guard against an excess of inflammatory action in
the joint and neighbouring parts, by an evaporating lotion, as the white
wash, and by the application of leeches, if necessary.

DISLOCATIONS OF THE SPINE,

or accidents that are usually considered such. If dislocation of the
spine do ever happen, it is a very rare accident, and I have never met
with a case of it. Still it is possible that dislocation of the cervical ver-
tebras might happen, as the articulating processes are more oblique in
them than in the other vertebrae. Dislocations of the spine seldom
occur without a fracture of the articulating processes, or of the arches of
the vertebras. Whenever fracture happens, displacement is generally
the immediate result, and the spinal marrow becomes compressed by the
arches of the vertebra. When the cervical and dorsal vertebrae are
fractured, the spinal marrow is generally torn, but in the lumbar ver-
tebrae the medulla spinalis becomes firmer, and is not so easily lacerated.
The symptoms produced by pressure on the spinal marrow, are a loss of
sensibility and of motion in the parts supplied from that portion of the
medulla below the accident. The extent of the effects of the injury must
therefore depend on its approximation to the brain. If the upper ver-
tebrae be injured, sensation is lost in the upper extremities ; if the dor-
sal vertebrae, or upper lumbar, the lower extremities become insensible ;
and if the lumbar be injured, the fasces pass involuntarily, and the urine
is retained : these phenomena may be accounted for in this way ; the
nerves of volition supplying the sphincter ani are injured, and the power
of retention is lost, whilst the involuntary peristaltic action of the intes-
tines continues; the nerves supplying the acceleratores urintc being in



DISLOCATIONS OF THE SPINE. 557

part derived from the cauda equina, have their functions destroyed ; the
will has no influence on the bladder, and the evacuation of the urine is
prevented, being opposed by the elasticity of the urethra. When the
patient becomes very weak, and is almost dying, the urine passes away
stillatitiously from the elasticity of the urethra being diminished. Per-
sons live sometimes three or four weeks after the accident, and in a case
or two that I can recollect, they lived between three and four months.
One man, indeed, recovered so far, that he could change his place in
bed, and dress himself, but he never recovered the use of his lower
extremities. When the injury has been received on the dorsal vertebraj,
the intestines are very much distended with air, and the functions of the
abdominal viscera are very much disturbed. A person having a frac-
ture of the dorsal vertebra commonly lives about a fortnight or three
weeks. One gentleman lived rather more than nine months after the
accident. But the time you may expect your patient to live will depend
very much whether the injury is near or distant from the cervical verte-
brae — whether the displacement is slight or otherwise, and upon the
degree of injury the spinal marrow has sustained. If the cervical
vertebrae be broken, death soon follows. Paralysis of the upper
extremities is sure to be the result, and also of the lower parts of the
body, but this paralysis is not complete. The fourth and fifth cervical
are most commonly fractured ; the intercostal muscles are paralysed,
respiration is very difficult, and wholly performed by the diaphragm, and
the patient dies sometimes in about thirty hours, but generally from three
to seven days. The abdomen is also distended from flatulency, as when
the dorsal vertebrae have been injured. The other symptoms are the
same as in fractures below the cervical, as regards the lower extremities,
the bladder, and the sphincter ani. If any of the cervical vertebrae be
broken above the fourth, death is immediately the result ; the phrenic
nerve is paralysed, and the action of the diaphragm consequently sus-
pended, and respiration can be no longer performed. Fractures some-
times occur without displacement, and by admitting of unnatural posi-
tions of the spinal column, produce symptoms of irritation; and
sometimes, by allowing pressure, cause death. This fracture (showing
a preparation), without displacement, happened in a child who lived
nearly twelve months after the accident ; he was obliged to walk very
carefully, and to support his head with his hand when he wanted to
turn towards any particular object. On dissection, it was found that the
atlas was broken through, and that the processus dentatus of the second
cervical vertebra had so far lost its support, that under the different in-
clinations of the head, great care was necessary to prevent its pressing
on the spinal marrow. Sometimes portions of the spinous processes are

3 b 2



558



DISLOCATIONS OF THE SPINE.



broken off, but these affect the spinal marrow in no other way than that
the blow necessary to accomplish the one usually produces a concus-
sion of the other. Extravasation sometimes takes place into the
spinal canal, from very severe blows upon the vertebra:, and if in any
considerable quantity, produces the usual symptoms of compression.
From the cause just mentioned, the spinal marrow is also liable to con-
cussion. The lower extremities become paralytic, in a degree propor-
tioned to the violence of the injury. The patient lies in great pain, and
unable to raise himself ; if you desire him to draw his thighs towards
his abdomen, he does so with great difficulty. A case of this kind was
brought into the other hospital ; he was cupped repeatedly in the loins,
and afterwards had a blister applied, which was kept open by ungt.
sabinse ; his bowels kept open by calomel and other purgatives, and a
stimulating linament rubbed daily on the lower extremities. In six
weeks the motion and sensation of his legs had almost returned, and he
completely recovered at the end of ten weeks. In one case of concussion,
it was found, on dissection, that the spinal marrow was lacerated, and
the person died with paralysis of the lower extremities and abdomen.
It was found in an experiment which Mr. Cline made on the spinal
marrow of a dog, that it re-united after dividing it, by pressure. Mr.
H. Cline was the first man who took a scientific view of fractures of the
vertebra:, attended with displacement. He proposed removing the arch
of the displaced vertebrae, by Hey’s saw. He performed the operation
once, but not successfully, and he had not an opportunity of repeating
it. Mr. Tyrrell very lately performed the same operation ; he made a
incision on the depressed bone, as the patient was lying on his chest,
and removed the arch ; the patient lived three weeks afterwards. On
dissection there was extensive peritoneal inflammation found, but from
what cause it arose is difficult to say. There is no reason why the
operation should not be performed ; it is not difficult ; it gives no pain,
and the patient cannot recover unless it be Hed ; it gives him, there-
fore, the best possible chance. There is a greater probability of recovery
in the lumbar than when the injury is received in the dorsal vertebra:.



LECTURE LXX.

Gentlemen, cases of dislocations of the ribs have been described by
different authors ; such cases must be extremely rare, and must also be
very difficult to detect. Their heads .are said to be thrown from their
articulations on the bodies of the vertebrae. But I have never seen
such a case. There is frequently a great irregularity of the cartilages,



DISLOCATIONS OF THE CLAVICLE.



559



which is mistaken for dislocation. This arises from constitutional
weakness ; the arch of the rib is diminished, the sides flattened, and
therefore the extremity of the ribs with the cartilages thrust forward.
It is generally the result of rickets. Very rarely a cartilage may be torn
from its connexion with the sternal end of the rib, and projects over its
surface. The same treatment would be necessary as in fracture of the
ribs. Desire the patient to make a deep inspiration, then depress the
projecting cartilage, put a wetted pasteboard splint upon the part, and
apply a flannel roller over it.

OF DISLOCATIONS OF THE CLAVICLE.

The sternal end of the clavicle is dislocated in two directions, for-
wards and backwards ; most frequently forwards, when it is thrown
upon the fore and upper part of the sternum. This accident may be
readily distinguished by the swelling seen on the upper part of the
sternum ; and, if the fingers be carried upon the surface of the sternum
upwards, this projection stops them ; but, if there be any doubt about
it, place your knee against the spine, draw the shoulders backwards,
and the clavicle sinks into its natural situation ; but immediately you
uncover the extension, the swelling again protrudes. If the shoulder be
elevated the projection descends, if the shoulder be drawn downwards
the extremity of the clavicle passes upwards towards the neck. The
motions of the clavicle are painful, and those of the shoulder performed
with difficulty. In a thin person, you see immediately the nature of
the accident; but in a stout person it is sometimes difficult. The
reduction is easily effected in the way just pointed out: apply the
clavicular bandage. The arm does not require to be supported. The
second dislocation is backwards, behind the sternum : this is a very rare
dislocation. I have never seen a case of it arising from injury, but it
has happened from great deformity of the spine, which advanced the
scapula, and did not leave sufficient room for the clavicle between the
scapula and sternum, and it gradually glided behind the sternum ; and
the pressure of the end of the bone was so great on the oesophagus as to
require its removal. It does not produce much difficulty of breathing,
because the trachea is pushed to the other side; but the oesophagus is
compressed, and produces great difficulty of swallowing. When it
arises from deformity of the spine, there is no mode of reducing it. In
the case just mentioned, the clavicle was sawn through about one inch
from the sternum, by Mr. Davis, late of Bungay, in Suffolk, and very
carefully dissected out. This was a very bold operation, but it suc-
ceeded perfectly. None but an excellent anatomist would have dared
to attempt it. The scapular end is more frequently dislocated than the



560



DISLOCATIONS OF THE CLAVICLE.



sternal. It may be detected by putting the finger on the spine of the
scapula, and tracing it forwards towards the acromion, where the finger
will be stopped by the projecting portion of the clavicle. The shoulder
will be depressed, and drawn inwards towards the sternum, and from
the projection of the clavicle it will appear flattened, something like the
dislocation into the axilla. This happens from the scapula having lost
its support, it being the office of the clavicle to separate the shoulder
widely from the sternum, to allow of more extensive motion. In the
reduction of this dislocation, you may use the mode thatw r as employed
in the dislocation at the sternal end. Let the knee be put between the
patient’s shoulders, and draw them backwards and upwards, and the
clavicle immediately is brought into its place. Then put a thick
cushion into each axilla, to keep the scapula from the side, to raise it,
and to prevent the axilla from being injured by the bandages. Then
the clavicular bandage is to be applied, and its straps should be broad
enough to press upon the clavicle and scapula. The arm should be
supported in a short sling, so as to keep the scapula well up. These
accidents, with the best treatment, will generally leave some deformity ;
and it is better, therefore, when first called to the accident, to state this
to the patient, as he may otherwise suppose that it has arisen from your
negligence or ignorance. You may, at the same time, inform him, that
a very good use of the limb will be restored, although a slight alteration
of the natural form of the parts may remain, such as a little projection
on the sternum, or on the sternal extremity of the clavicle.

The humerus is liable to be dislocated in four directions. The first
and most common of these is downwards and inwards into the axilla;
the bone here rests on the inner side of the inferior costa of the scapula.
It may be known by the projection of the acromion, by the natural
rotundity of the shoulder being lost, by the deltoid being flattened and
dragged down with the head of the bone. The arm is rather longer
than the other, and the elbow is carried from the side. Although the
arm is longer than natural in a recent dislocation, yet, if the accident
has been of some duration, the head of the bone becomes imbedded in
the soft parts, and the limb is then shortened. The elbow is with
difficulty brought to the side, from the head of the bone being, in this
attempt, pressed upon the axillary plexus of nerves, and the patient
will generally come to you supporting the arm with the other hand, to
prevent its weight pressing upon these nerves. If the elbow be carried
outwards, nearly at right angles with the trunk, the head of the bone
can be distinctly felt in the axilla; but this cannot be done if the elbow
be allowed to remain close to the side. The raising the elbow throws
the head of the bone downwards, and more into the axilla, and therefore



DISLOCATIONS OF THE CLAVICLE.-



561



can be more easily felt in the axilla. The motion of the joint upwards
and outwards is in a great measure lost, and therefore the patient cannot
raise his hand to his head. This question is generally asked, “ Can
you raise your hand to your head?” The answer invariably is, that he
cannot ; and you immediately make up your mind that it is a dislocation.
The patient can swing his arm a little forwards and backwards as it
hangs by his side. The central axis of the limb may also be observed
to run into the axilla. There is usually a numbness in the fingers,
from the pressure of the head of the bone on the axillary plexus. Well,
then, the principal marks of the accident will be, the falling of the
shoulder, the presence of the head of the bone in the axilla, and the
loss of the natural motions of the joint. But in a short time these
appearances are less decisive, from the extravasation and tension which
follow. The common causes of a dislocation of the humerus into the
axilla, are, — falls upon the hand while the arm is much raised ; or by a
fall upon the elbow when the arm is raised from the side, by which the
head of the bone is thrown downwards. But the most frequent cause of
this accident is a fall directly on the shoulder on some projecting body,
by which the head of the bone is suddenly driven downwards.

Dislocations are very apt to recur from very slight causes. If the
muscular power be considerable, or if the accident has occurred a few
days, the reduction is usually accomplished in the following way : place
the patient in a chair, let the scapula be well secured by a bandage
passed over it, with a slit in it to receive the arm, and buckled over the
acromion : this keeps the bandage close up in the axilla, and more com-
pletely fixes the scapula ; or it may be done by a towel folded round
the scapula, and tied close above the acromion. Pass a wetted roller
round the arm, just above the elbow, to protect the skin, and upon this
a strong worsted tape is to be fastened with what the sailors call the
clove-hitch ; the arm should be raised at right angles with the body,
or a little above it, to relax the deltoid and super-spinatus. Two per-
sons should now make extension from the bandage fastened to the arm,
and two from the scapular bandage, with a steady and equal force.
After the extension has been made a few minutes, the surgeon should
place his knee in the axilla, resting his foot on the chair on which
the patient sits, and raise his knee by extending his foot ; and placing
his hand at the same time on the acromion, he pushes it downwards,
when the head of the bone usually slips into its place. While the
extension is making, a gentle rotatory motion will diminish the counte-
racting power of the muscles, and assist the reduction ; the fore-arm
should be bent to nearly right angles with the upper arm. If the limb
has been a long time dislocated, and if the muscles are so firmly con-



562



DISLOCATIONS OF THE CLAVICLE.



traded that tile force to be applied in the way I have just recommended
does not succeed, the reduction must be attempted by means of the
pullies ; more on account of employing the force gradually and equally,
than of their increase in power. The patient should sit between two
staples to be fixed in the wall, the bandages are to be applied in the
way before described, and the surgeon should draw the pulley himself,
and the degree of extension be gradually increased until the patient
complains of pain, then stop a little and extend again. (Here I may
mention to you the great advantage to be gained in engaging the
patient’s attention, and directing it to some other object during the
attempt at reduction). Then extend the arm again, and continue it
until the patient again complains ; and thus, at intervals of three or
four minutes, you may continue the extension for a quarter of an hour.
If this pain should not succeed, you must use the constitutional measures
before pointed out, and try the extension again. But in the hospital
I generally order, when I expect much resistance, the warm bath and
nauseating doses of tartarized antimony, to precede the application of
the pulleys.

If the patient should be an elderly lady, or a relaxed, emaciated
person, you may generally succeed in reducing the dislocation in this
way : — Put the person in a low chair ; carry the knee into the axilla,
by separating the arm sufficiently from the side, and let your foot rest
on the foot of the chair ; take hold of the arm firmly, just above the
condyles, with one hand, and place the other on the shoulder; draw
the arm over the knee, raise the knee a little at the same time, and
depress the shoulder with the other hand, when the bone will gene-
rally slip into its socket. But the mode I usually adopt, in all recent
cases, is the following : — Lay the patient on his back, either on a bed
or sofa, and bring him near to the edge of it ; let a towel be passed
over the scapula, in the manner before mentioned, and given to a per-
son to hold fast; then tie a handkerchief above the elbow, having pre-
viously passed a wetted roller round the arm, carry the patient’s arm from
his side, and sit yourself on the edge of the bed ; then place your heel
in the axilla, and extend the arm : draw steadily for three or tour
minutes, and the bone is replaced. If more force should be necessary
than you can make with the handkerchief, you can pass a towel round
the arm in its stead, and let two or three persons pull at it, the heel
being still kept into the axilla. This plan I should recommend you
to adopt in ordinary cases.

The second dislocation is forwards, beneath the clavicle, upon the
second rib, and having the coracoid process on its outer side. This
accident is more easily ascertained than the dislocation in the axilla.



s



DISLOCATIONS OF THE CLAVICLE. 503

The projection of the acromion appears greater, from the depression
of the deltoid being more considerable. There is a prominence to be
observed beneath the middle of the clavicle ; and, on rotating the arm,
the head of the bone may be felt to roll ; the elbow is thrown from the
side, and at the same time carried backwards ; and the motions of the
arm are more confined than in the dislocation into the axilla. The pain
attending this accident is slighter than the one just mentioned, because
the axillary plexus of nerves is not compressed. These marks place the
nature of the accident beyond all doubt.

The reduction is to be effected by the same means as in the former
dislocation. The same bandage should be used and the arm bent ; but
the direction in which the bone is drawn, is the principal circumstance
to be attended to. The extension must first be made obliquely down-
wards and backwards, until the head of the bone has passed the coracoid
process, then it may be raised in a horizontal direction, and, by the
pressure of the heel in the axilla, the bone will be easily returned.

The third dislocation is backwards, on the dorsum scapulae, just be-
neath the spine. It is readily distinguished by the projection of the
head of the bone, and by its following the movements of the elbow
when rotated. Only two cases have occurred in Guy’s Hospital during
thirty-eight years. The bandages are to be applied in the same manner
as in the dislocation into the axilla, and the extension made in the same
direction, rotating, at the same time, the head of the bone inwards.

The fourth dislocation of the humerus is only partial. It is an acci-
dent which frequently occurs. The head of the bone is thrown for-
wards against the coracoid process ; there is a hollow at the back part of
the shoulder joint ; the axis of the arm is thrown inwards and forwards ;
the under motions of the arm are still performed, but it cannot be raised,
from its striking against the coracoid process. The head of the bone
may be felt to rotate. The reduction is the same as that for the dislo-
cation forwards, but the shoulders should also be drawn backwards, to
bring the head of the bone to the glenoid cavity. After the reduction,
the shoulders must be secured by the clavicular bandage, or the bone
will again slip forwards against the coracoid process. An injury of
great violence may occasion the head of the bone to be forced through
the integuments in the dislocation forwards. The reduction should be
immediately effected, as was before recommended in the dislocation for-
wards. A suture should be introduced, and lint, dipped in blood, ap-
plied to the wound, and adhesive plaster, to retain the apposition of the
wound ; the limb should be kept close to the side, by a roller including
the arm, and thus the least motion prevented. By this treatment, the



564



DISLOCATIONS OF THE CLAVICLE.

suppurative inflammation will be prevented, and the patient’s life not
endangered.

Accidents about the shoulder joint, with which dislocations are liable
to be confounded, are, first, fracture of the acromion. Here the round-
ness of the shoulder is, in some measure, lost, and the head of the bone
drops towards the axilla. It may be readily distinguished by the
shoulder regaining its proper shape on supporting the arm, and by its
again sinking when that support is removed. If you trace the spine of
the scapula forwards to the clavicle, on reaching that part the finger
sinks into a depression ; then raise the arm, and place one hand firmly
on the acromion, and rotate the elbow with the other, and you will
distinctly perceive a crepitus. In the treatment of this accident, you
are to make the head of the os humeri act as a splint, to support
the detached portion of bone : with this view, then, you support the
elbow in a short sling, and bend the fore-arm across the chest ; put a
thick pad between the elbow and the side, so as to separate it widely
from it, in order to relax the deltoid. Let the motion of the arm be
perfectly prevented, by binding it firmly to the chest by a roller : the
elbow should be carried a little backwards. The arm should be kept
firmly fixed for three weeks ; it will unite by bone, if motion be per-
fectly prevented ; but, as this is very difficult to accomplish, the union
is generally ligamentous. The second accident is more likely to be mis •
taken for dislocation than any other ; and this is the fracture through the
neck of the scapula. It is impossible, by mere inspection, to distin-
guish this from dislocation into the axilla. It is to be known by car-
rying the hand over the shoulder, and resting the finger on the coracoid
process ; then, by rotating the arm, a crepitus will be felt. Let the
surgeon place his arm under the arm of the patient, and by raising it
a little, he restores the natural appearance of the joint; but, by taking
away that support, the shoulder again sinks. The treatment of this
fracture is, to place a thick pad in the axilla, to carry the humerus,
and with it the glenoid cavity, outwards : to support the humerus in
a short sling, to preserve the parts in apposition.

The clavicular bandage will assist in keeping the head of the bone
outwards, and the motion of the arm may be prevented by confining it
to the chest by a roller. It requires from ten to twelve weeks for its
recovery, and continues weak for three weeks after.

The third is the fracture through the neck of the humerus. This
may be distinguished in the same way as the accident just mentioned,
and, by passing the hand over the shoulder joint, and fixing the head of
the humerus with the fingers, whilst, at the same time, having raised



DISLOCATIONS OF THE ELBOW.



565



the elbow, and carried the upper part of the humerus a little outwards,
you will feel a crepitus on rotating the elbow ; but the head of the bone
does not follow the rotation of the arm. You are to apply a roller,
from the elbow to the shoulder joint, and put a splint on the inner and
outer side of the arm, to be confined by another roller ; a thick pad
is to be placed in the axilla, and the arm gently supported in a sling.
The principal difficulty is to prevent the pectoral muscle drawing the
body of the bone forwards : but, if the inner splint be properly applied,
its influence will be counteracted. It requires from three to six weeks
to unite, according to the age of the patient.

OF DISLOCATIONS OF THE ELBOW.

The elbow may be dislocated in five directions ; and first, of the dis-
location of both bones backwards. This accident is strongly marked
by the alteration in the form of the joint, and by its great loss of mo-
tion. There is a considerable projection formed posteriorly, by the ulna
and radius. On each side of the olecranon there is a hollow ; a large
hard swelling is felt at the part of the joint, immediately behind the
tendon of the biceps, which is the extremity of the humerus. The hand
and fore-arm are in a state of supination, and you cannot turn them
prone. The cause of the accident is generally this : a person, when
falling, puts out his hand to save himself ; but the arm not being per-
fectly extended, the whole weight of the body is thrown upon the radius
and ulna, and they are forced behind the axis of the humerus. The
dislocation is to be reduced in this way : let the patient be seated on a
chair ; take hold of his wrist, and put your knee on the inner side of
the elbow joint; then bend the fore-arm, and at the same time press
upon the radius and ulna with the knee, so as to separate them from
the humerus, and so as to throw the coronoid process of the ulna from
the posterior fossa of the humerus, where it is lodged. Whilst this pres-
sure is kept up by the knee, the arm is to be forcibly, at the same time,
gradually, bent, and the bones will slip into their places. After the
reduction, the arm should be kept flexed, and a bandage applied, which
should be kept wet with an evaporating lotion, and the arm supported
in a sling. The fore -arm should be bent at rather less than a right
angle with the upper arm. The elbow may be dislocated laterally,
when the ulna will be thrown either on the external or internal condyle.
When thrown outwards, the projection is greater than in the disloca-
tion backwards : as the coronoid process, instead of being lodged in the
posterior fossa, is thrown behind the external condyle, and the radius
forms a protuberance behind, and on the outer side of the humerus, so
as to produce a hollow above it ; on rotating the hand, the radius may

3 c



566



DISLOCATIONS OF THE ELBOM'.



be felt to move. The ulna is sometimes thrown upon the internal con-
dyle, but it projects posteriorly, as in the dislocation outwards, and the
head of the radius is situated in the posterior fossa of the humerus. It
may be known by the great projection of the external condyle of the
humerus, and by the hollow above the olecranon on the inner and back
part of the arm. Its reduction may be accomplished as in the former
dislocation, by bending the arm over the knee, without turning it di-
rectly outwards or inwards ; for, as soon as the radius and ulna are
separated from the humerus by the pressure of the knee, the feiceps and
the brachialis internus, which have been before kept powerfully upon
the stretch, gives the bones the proper direction for reduction.

The third dislocation is backwards. The ulna is sometimes thrown
backwards upon the humerus, whilst the radius remains in its proper
situation. The deformity of the limb is very great, by the fore-arm
and hand being twisted inwards, whilst the olecranon projects consi-
derably backwards. The fore-arm cannot be extended, nor can it be
bent to more than a right angle. It is rather more difficult to detect
than the other dislocation of the elbow, but it may be known by the
projection of the ulna, and the twisting inwards of the fore-arm. It is
more easily reduced than when both the bones are dislocated ; you may
do it readily, by bending the arm over the knee, and drawing the fore-
arm downwards. In addition to the action of the brachialis internus,
the radius, by resting on the external condyle, will act as a lever to the
fore-arm, in pushing the os humeri backwards on the ulna, when the
arm is bent. The radius is sometimes separated from its connexion
with the coronoid process of the ulna, and is thrown forwards, into the
hollow above the external condyle of the os humeri, and upon the coro-
noid process of the ulna. The fore-arm is slightly bent, but cannot be
brought to a right angle with the upper, nor can it be perfectly ex-
tended ; when bent suddenly, the flexion is checked by the head of the
radius striking against the fore part of the os humeri. The hand is
between pronation and supination, but neither can be done perfectly,
but it is nearer pronation. By carrying the thumb into the fore part of
the elbow joint, and rotating at the same time the hand, the head of
the radius will be felt to rotate also ; and this, with the sudden check
to the bending of the fore-arm, are the best marks of the injury. This
accident happens from a fall upon the hand when the arm is extended,
and the radius receives the weight of the body. In attempting to reduce
this dislocation, the hand should be turned supine, the fore-arm should
be bent, and extension made from the hand, without including the ulna.
Numerous and powerful attempts have been made to reduce this dislo-
cation, and frequently without success ; but, by attending to the cir-



DISLOCATIONS OF TI1E ELBOW.



567



cumstances I have just mentioned, I have succeeded in two or three
cases ; and I have only seen six of these accidents, and one of these was
a patient of Mr. Cline’s.

Of the dislocation of the radius backwards, I have never seen a case
in the living body; but a subject was brought into our dissecting
room with this accident : I have no doubt but that it might be easily
reduced by bending the fore-arm ; a bandage should afterwards be
worn.

The dislocations of the wrist joint are of three kinds. — First, of the
dislocations of both bones. This is not of very frequent occurrence ;
but the bones may be either thrown backwards or forwards, according
to the direction of the force applied. If a person in falling receives his
weight upon the palm, the carpal bones are thrown backwards, and the
radius and ulna forwards. The marks of the accident are these : a
swelling is produced by the radius and ulna on the fore part of the
wrist, and a similar swelling is seen on the back part, with a depression
above it. The hand is forcibly bent back. If a person fall on the hack
part of the hand, the carpus is forced under the flexor tendons, and the
radius and ulna are thrown upon the back part of the hand. These two
projections become the diagnostic marks of the accident, and will dis-
tinguish it from a swelling on the fore part of the hand, about the
flexor tendons, in consequence of a violent sprain ; as in this case there is
only one swelling, and it does not appear immediately after the accident,
but gradually increases in size. The reduction of this dislocation, in
either form, is not difficult. Grasp the patient’s hand with your right,
and support the fore-arm with your left hand, whilst an assistant places
his hand firmly round the arm, just above the elbow. Then let both
extend, and the bones are soon replaced. The muscles will direct the
bones into the proper situation, as soon as the extension is sufficiently
made. A roller should be applied round the wrist, wetted with an eva-
porating lotion, and a splint be placed before and behind the fore-arm,
reaching to the extremities of the metacarpal bones.

The radius only, is sometimes thrown forwards upon the carpus ;
in this case, the outer side of the hand is thrown backwards, and the
inner forwards. The extremity of the bone forms a protuberance on
the fore part of the wrist. The extension necessary to produce this dis-
location, and the after treatment, are the same as when both bones are
displaced. The ulna is sometimes separated from the radius by the
rupture of the sacriform ligament, and it usually projects backwards.
It is known by its projection above the level of the os cuneiforme, and
by its being easily returned by pressure to its former situation, and by
its rising again when the pressure is removed. After you have put the



rm



DISLOCATIONS OF THE CARPUS.



head of the boneinto its place, put a compress of leather on its ex-
tremities, to keep it in a line with the radius. Splints should be placed
along the fore-arm, and a roller applied over the splints to confine them
with firmness.



LECTURE LXXI.

DISLOCATIONS OF THE BONES OF THE CARPUS.

Gentlemen, a dislocation of a carpal bone is of very rare occurrence,
and generally happens to a person, when falling, receiving the weight
of the body on the part ; and it is also sometimes attended with a frac-
ture of the radius. It has happened also, from relaxation of the liga-
ments of the carpus. I have known the os magnum and the os cunei-
forme thrown out of their natural situation from this cause, and form a
projection at the back part of the wrist on bending the hand. This de-
prives the person of the power of using the hand, unless the wrist is at
the same time supported. In these cases, straps of adhesive plaster
should be braced rather tightly about the wrist, to support and
strengthen it ; and over these you should pass a bandage, which would
afford it additional support. Pumping cold water upon the hand, from
a considerable height, is also very useful, and rubbing the parts after-
wards with a coarse towel gives vigour to the circulation, and increases
the strength of the joint.

Sometimes ganglia are mistaken for dislocations of the carpal bones ;
but these are easily removed by striking them smartly with the fiat sur-
face of a book, and the supposed dislocation immediately disappears.

A compound dislocation of the carpal bones frequently happens; it
arises, generally, from the bursting of guns, or the hand being caught
in machinery. In these cases, one or two of the carpal bones may be
dissected away, and the patient recover without losing his hand, and
also preserve a considerable degree of motion in the part. If, however,
greater injury be done, amputation is generally necessary.

I have seldom seen the metacarpal bones dislocated, except as the
result of excessive violence. They are so firmly connected with the
bones of the carpus, that great force is necessary to separate them, and
so much injury is done to the parts, that amputation is generally
required. These cases usually happen from the bursting of guns, or
the passage of heavy bodies over the hand. If it should happen that
the metacarpal bones of the middle and ring fingers require to be
removed, you may bring the fore and little fingers so nicely together as
to produce little deformity ; that is, if you can succeed in procuring
union by adhesion.



DISLOCATIONS OF THE FINGERS, &c. 569



. dislocations of the fingers and toes
are rare ; for, in addition to their capsular and lateral ligaments, their
articulations are powerfully strengthened by the extensor and flexor ten-
dons. When the accident does occur, it is more frequently found be-
tween the first and second phalanges, than between the second and
third. It can be readily ascertained, by the projection of the first pha-
lanx backwards, while the head of the second can be felt on the fore
part, although less distinctly. If it has not been dislocated many
hours, you can easily reduce it ; but, if it has been neglected at first,
the reduction can only be accomplished by long continued extension,
and that very steadily applied. It should be recollected to give the
joint a slight inclination forwards, to relax the flexor muscles. I would
never advise you to divide the ligament of the joint in order to facilitate
its reduction. No, I have seen too much evil attending it ever to recom-
mend such a practice. The dislocations of the toes are rather more
difficult to reduce than the fingers, as the phalanges are much shorter,
and the parts less easily moved, from their being less stiff. A toe or
finger is sometimes thrown out of its natural situation by the flexor
tendon and theca, or even the palmar fascia becoming contracted, as the
effect of chronic inflammation, from excessive action of the parts, as in
rowing or ploughing. When the thecae are contracted, nothing should
be attempted, as no operation will succeed ; but when a thickened band
of fascia appears to be the cause of the contraction, it may easily be
divided by a pointed bistoury introduced through a very small wound
in the integument. The finger should be then extended, and kept in
this position by a splint.

Dislocations of the Thumb . — On account of the numerous strong
muscles inserted into the thumb, its dislocations are very difficult to
reduce. These muscles necessarily offer great resistance when the at-
tempt is made to restore the parts to their proper situations, and I con-
sider, therefore, the dislocations of the thumb the most difficult to reduce,
especially if any time be allowed to elapse after the accident before the
attempt at reduction be made.

The metacarpal bone is sometimes dislocated from the trapezium. I
have seen many cases of this accident, and in most of them I have found
that it has been thrown inwards, between the trapezium and the root of
the metacarpal bone of the fore finger. Considerable pain and swelling
arc produced by this accident, but it may be detected by the protube-
rance formed towards the palm of the hand, by the thumb being bent
backwards, and not allowing of its being brought towards the little
finger. What I have before said respecting the relaxation of muscles

3 c 2



570



DISLOCATIONS OF



inserted into a dislocated part, is particularly necessary to be attended
to here. You know that the flexor muscles are much stronger
than the extensors, and you will, therefore, very much facilitate the
reduction by giving the thumb a little inclination towards the palm of
the hand; in this manner the flexors may be relaxed, and their resist-
ance diminished. The extension must be steadily continued for a con-
siderable time, as no sudden violence will effect the reduction. The
mode of doing this, I shall describe presently. If the bone cannot be
reduced by simple extension, it is better to leave the case to the degree
of recovery which nature will in time produce, than run any risk of
injuring the nerves and blood vessels, by dividing the muscles or liga-
ments. A compound dislocation of this bone is sometimes produced
by the bursting of guns ; but, in these cases, you can easily return it to
its natural situation : and, if the flexor tendon should have escaped un-
hurt, the person may recover useful motion of the part. You should
bring the integuments together as nicely as you can, confine them by a
suture, if necessary, and over this put a piece of lint dipped in blood,
which is the best application ; if necessary, you must apply a poultice,
but where the bruise has not been very considerable, it will heal by the
adhesive process. A case of this kind occurred a short time since, from
the explosion of a powder-flask, in the hand of a young gentleman, at
Brentford ; the thumb was only connected to the hand by the tendons
of the long extensor and flexor ; it was treated in the way I have just
recommended, and passive motion employed at the end of a fortnight,
by which the motion of the joint was so restored as to enable him to
write without any inconvenience.

Dislocation of the First Phalanx . — In the simple dislocation of this
bone, you will find it thrown back upon the metacarpal bone, where it
forms a projection ; and the lower part of the metacarpal bone projects
inwards, towards the palm of the hand. The thumb may be brought
towards the fingers, but the flexion and extension, which are performed
between the metacarpal bone and the first phalanx are prevented by the
dislocation. Here also the direction in which the extension is to be
made must be attended to ; the thumb should be bent towards the
palm, in order to relax the flexor muscles, and the mode of applying
the extending force is as follows, which may be generally adopted in
dislocations of the toes, thumb, and fingers : — In order to relax the parts
as much as possible, the hand should be soaked for a considerable time
in warm water, a piece of wetted wash leather is to be as closely wrapped
round the first phalanx as possible ; a tape, about two yards in lengtii,
should be fastened on the leather with a knot which will not slip, such
as sailors call the clove hitch. An assistant should now firmly press on



THE FINGERS AND TOES.



571



the metacarpal bone, by putting his middle and first fingers between the
fore-finger and thumb of the patient, and thus make counter-extension,
whilst the surgeon, assisted by others, draws the first phalanx from the
metacarpal bone, inclining it at the same time a little towards the palm
of the hand. If the efforts made in this way, after having been con-
tinued ten or fifteen minutes, should not succeed, then it will be necessary
to adopt another plan, which is this : in addition to the apparatus
already employed, let a strong worsted tape be carried between the
metacarpal bone and fore-finger, bend the fore-arm round a bed-post,
and let the tape be firmly tied to it, so as to prevent the hand yielding
when extension is made. To the tape surrounding the first phalanx, a
pulley is to be applied, and extension made, which will generally suc-
ceed. With the greatest care and attention, and with the most perse-
vering efforts, you will sometimes fail in reducing this dislocation where
it has been neglected, and much time allowed to intervene between the
occurrence of the accident and your attempts at reduction. Although
this should be the case, no division of the parts should be made, as the
patient will have, after a time, a very useful thumb. In compound dis-
locations of the first phalanx, if the wound be large, and much difficulty
is experienced in the reduction, I would advise you rather to saw off
the extremity of the bone, than injure the parts further by the pressure
which would be necessary. Lint dipped in blood should be applied to
the wound, a roller lightly passed round, and evaporating lotions to be
used for several days until the wound be healed. If passive motion be
begun early, a very useful joint will be formed.

A Dislocation of the Second Phalanx , when simple, will be best
reduced by grasping firmly the back of the first phalanx with your
fingers, and placing the thumb on the fore part of the dislocated phalanx,
then bending it on the first as much as you can. In this way you may
lift the second over the lower part of the first phalanx, by making your
thumb the fulcrum. When there is a compound dislocation of this
joint, in addition to the sawing off the ends of the bone, you should pare
the ends of the tendon smoothly with the knife, and if you then bring
them together they will unite. Passive motion should be begun at the
end of a fortnight or three weeks.

OF DISLOCATIONS OF THE LOWER JAW.

The lower jaw is subject to two species of dislocation, the complete
and partial. 'When the jaw is completely dislocated, both its condyles
are advanced into the space between the surface of the temporal bone
and zygomatic arch. When it is partial, one condyloid process only



572 DISLOCATIONS OF THE LOWER JAW.

advances, whilst the other remains in the articular cavity of the tem-
poral bone.

The jaw is known to be completely dislocated by the mouth being
open, and the patient not being able to shut it by any pressure which you
may make on the chin. The lower teeth will be found in a line ante-
rior to the upper. You may depress the jaw a little, but to a very in-
considerable extent. The appearance is just that of a person when
yawning. There is a depression just before the meatus auditorius,
from the absence of the condyloid process from its cavity, and there is
a projection of the cheeks, from the coronoid processes being advanced
towards the buccinators. The pain, although severe, is not attended
with any dangerous consequences ; a considerable degree of motion is
recovered by time, and the jaws nearly approximated. The saliva is
very much increased in quantity, in consequence of irritation of the
parotid glands, and it dribbles over the mouth. A blow upon the chin,
when the mouth is widely opened, will cause this accident. Yawning
very deeply will also sometimes produce the same effect. The jaw has
also been dislocated in the attempts made to draw teeth, by a sudden
action of the hand when the mouth has been too widely opened. In
the partial dislocation of the jaw, the mouth is not so widely opened as
in the complete dislocation, but the patient cannot close it, from the
condyloid process on one side being advanced under the zygoma. This
accident is easily distinguished, by the chin being thrown to the oppo-
site side of the dislocation, the incisor teeth are advanced upon the upper
jaw, but are no longer in a line with the axis of the face. When you
are first called to this accident, the patient presents a very ludicrous
appearance, from the twist which is given to the face ; it is, on the
whole, however, a serio-comic spectacle. These dislocations are gene-
rally reduced, by wrapping a handkerchief around the thumbs; placing
them on the coronoid processes, and depressing the jaw, you force it
backwards as well as downwards, and the bone suddenly slips into its
place. In a recent dislocation, this mode will succeed very well, but
not so easily as the modes which I shall presently describe to you. I
should advise you to place some body that will not injure the gums,
behind the molar teeth on each side of the mouth, and for this purpose
I know no better material than two corks, and then raise the chin over
them. This practice is very effectual in reducing the dislocation, and
is less likely to injure the bene or the soft parts. I have also used two
forks for the same purpose. Having wrapped a towel or handkerchief
round their points, I carried their handles into the mouth on each side
behind the molar teeth; they were then held by an assistant; and.



DISLOCATIONS OF THE HIP JOINT. 573

drawing the chin towards the upper jaw, the bone was easily and quickly
reduced.

Mr. Fox, the late dentist, has used a lever of wood, about a foot long ;
he placed the end of it on the molar tooth on one side, then supported
the outer part of the piece of wood with one hand, and depressed the end
on the tooth with the other, and with the force thus used, he succeeded
in reducing the jaw ; he then did the same on the other side, and thus
completely replaced the bone. This mode is best adapted, I think, for
the cases in partial dislocation; but I generally prefer the corks, the
recumbent posture, and the elevation of the chin.

An imperfect dislocation of the jaw sometimes happens from a relaxa-
tion of the ligaments, something in the same way as that in which the
thigh bone is thrown from the semilunar cartilages. The jaw appears
to quit the interarticular cartilage of the temporal cavity, slips before
its edge, and fixes the jaw, the mouth being at the same time slightly
opened. The natural efforts generally restore the situation of the parts,
but I have seen it continue fora length of time; yet the motion of the
jaw, and the power of closing the mouth, have returned. You must,
in your attempt to return the jaw, press directly downwards ; by which
you separate the jaw, from the temporal bone, and allow the cartilage to
replace itself on the extremity of the condyloid process. A snapping
is sometimes heard when the bone is returned to its socket. Young
women are generally the subjects of this complaint, and I have frequently
found the ammonia and steel, with the shower-bath, and a blister before
the ear, remove the disposition to the re-appearance of the accident.
These means accomplish this, of course, by giving a general tone to the
system, and also to the relaxed parts. When the jaw has been once
dislocated, it is easily displaced again from a slight cause, and therefore
the motions of it should be limited ; this will be best done by making
a hole in the middle of a broad tape, to receive the chin, and split the
ends into two parts, bring one over the top of the head, and the other
over the occiput, and the tendency to subsequent luxation will be
prevented.

I shall now proceed to speak of

DISLOCATIONS OF THE HII> JOINT.

It pernaps may cause no little astonishment in some of you, when I
say, that there was a period in the history of surgery, and that not very
remote, in which the dislocation of the thigh bone was considered an
impossibility ; but, gentlemen, such is the general advancement of the
science, and such are now the opportunities of acquiring information,
and such the improvements of modern surgery, that pupils now know



574 DISLOCATIONS OF THE HIP JOINT.

much more than their professors formerly did. Asa proof of this I can
tell you that the dressers of Guy’s Hospital a short time since, were not
only able to distinguish this dislocation, but they knew also how to
reduce it, and actually accomplished it, without even having occasion
to send for the surgeon.

I have seen the thigh bone dislocated in four directions : — 1, up-
wards, or upon the dorsum of the ilium ; 2, downwards, or into the
foramen ovale ; 3, backwards and upwards, or into the ischiatic notch ;
4, forwards and upwards, or on the body of the pubis. [The lecturer
now mounted a chair, and imitated the position of the dislocated limb
in the varieties which he had described.] Another dislpcation has been
described by some surgeons, namely, downwards and backwards. No
such accident has occurred in Guy’s, or at St. Thomas’s Hospital,
within the last thirty years, neither have I met with a case of the kind
in my private practice. I frill not deny the possibility of its happen-
ing, but I very much doubt it ; and I think there must have been some
mistake in the description.

First, of the dislocation upwards, or on the dorsum of the ilium ;
this happens more frequently than any other dislocation of the hip
joint, and it may be known by the following signs : — The toe rests
against the tarsus of the opposite foot ; the knee and foot are turned
inwards, and the knee is a little advanced upon the other; the limb is
about one inch and a half, or two inches and a half, shorter than the
other, and this may easily be detected, by comparing the malleoli in-
terni when the foot is bent at right angles with the leg. If you try to
separate the leg from the other, you find you cannot do it, as the abduc-
tion of the limb is completely prevented, but you may bend the thigh a
little across the other. The trochanter is less prominent than on the
opposite side, from the neck of the bone and the trochanter lying in a
line with the surface of the ilium ; the rouudness of that side will,
therefore, have disappeared. When called to this accident, you must
expect to find great extravasation, which will conceal, in some degree,
the situation of the parts ; but by rotation of the knee inwards, the head
of the thigh bone may be felt, and the trochanter major approaches the
anterior superior spinous process of the ilium. Well, then, when you
are called to this accident, what you must expect to find will be a dif-
ference in the length of the limb, a change of position inwards, a dimi-
nution of motion, and a flattening of that side by the altered situation
of the trochanter major.

This accident may be distinguished from fracture of the neck of the
thigh bone, within the capsular ligament, with which it is most likely
to be confounded, by symptoms which are sufficiently distinct to a per-



DISLOCATIONS OF THE HIP JOINT.



575



son who is commonly attentive. In the fracture of the neck, the knee
and foot are turned outwards, the trochanter is drawn upwards and
backwards, resting on the dorsum ilii ; you may bend the thigh to-
wards the abdomen, although it gives some pain. But one of the prin-
cipal marks of the accident is, that although the limb may be shortened
one or two inches, according to the duration of the accident, yet, by ex-
tension, you may restore the natural length of the limb, but the limb
is again shortened immediately on your removing the extending force.
If, when you have drawn down the bone, you rotate it, you can dis-
tinctly feel a crepitus, but this ceases to be felt when the limb is allowed
to be again shortened. Fractures of the neck within the capsular liga-
ment occur but rarely, except in advanced periods of life, and are pro-
duced by slight causes ; this is owing to the interstitial absorption
which this part of the bone undergoes in age. Thus, then, you see
that the increased mobility of the parts, the easy extension of the limb,
and its then producing a crepitus, will readily distinguish the one acci-
dent from the other. No man who possesses a good knowledge of ana-
tomy, or who has paid attention to his profession, could ever confound
dislocations arising from violence, with diseases of the hip joint. The
gradual progress of the symptoms, the pain in the knee, the apparent
elongation at first, and the real shortening afterwards, the power of mo-
tion remaining, yet that motion producing pain, especially under the
extremes of rotation, are marks of difference which must strike the most
careless observer.

The consequences of a disease of this kind, when it has existed a
great length of time, are such a change in the situation of the parts,
from the ulceration of the ligaments, head of the bone, and acetabulum,
as to make the limb appear like a dislocation. But the history of the
case at once points out its nature.

The dislocation on the dorsum ilii is produced by the patient hilling
when the knee and foot are turned inwards, or by a blow being received
while the limb is in that position. The following plan is to be adopted
in attempting to reduce this dislocation : — Bleed the patient to twelve
or twenty ounces, or more, if he be a very strong man. Next place
him in a warm bath, at 100 deg , gradually increase it to 110 deg.,
until he begins to feel faint. Whilst he is in the bath, give him one
grain of tartarized antimony, until he feels nausea ; then wrap him in
a blanket, and place him on a table, between two strong posts, into
which two staples have been fixed ; or if you cannot find a convenient
place for this, place him on the floor, and screw two rings, about the
distance I have mentioned, into 'the floor. The plan I usually adopt is,
to place him on a table covered with a blanket, on his back ; then a



576



DISLOCATIONS OF THE HIP JOINT.



strong girt is passed between his pudendum and thigh, and this is fixed
to one of the staples. A wetted linen roller should be applied just
above the knee, and on this a leather strap is to be buckled, having two
straps with rings at right angles with the circular part. The knee
should be slightly bent, not quite at a right angle, and brought across
the opposite thigh a little above the knee. The pullies are to be hooked
to the rings on the circular strap, and fixed to the other staple. You
should now tighten the pullies, till you see the bandage is on the stretch,
and the patient begins to complain of pain ; then wait a little, with the
degree of extension you have now made, to give the muscles time to
fatigue ; then draw again gently, and when the patient complains much,
stop again, until the muscles yield ; and so go on, until you find the
head of the bone is brought just opposite the acetabulum. Let the same
extension be kept up, by another person taking the string of the pullies;
and then rotate the limb gently, and the bone will generally slip into
its place. You must not expect to hear a snap when the bone is re-
turned, as, by using the pullies, the muscles are so much relaxed that
they cannot act with sufficient violence ; and you can, therefore, only
tell if it is reduced by loosening the bandages, and comparing the length
of the limb. If there should be any difficulty in bringing the head of
the bone over the edge of the acetabulum, you may pass your hand or
a napkin under it, and lift it over the edge of the socket. You should
take great care in removing a patient to his bed, as, from the relaxed
state of the muscles, the dislocation would again happen, and that from
a cause so trifling that you would not suspect it to have occurred. I
consider it the birthright of every man to think and act for himself.
Gentlemen, do not let your opinions be shackled by prejudice — do not
follow implicitly the dictates of any man ; and, if, when you get into
practice, you do not find the advice which I have given you on this, or
any other subject, correct, then throw it aside, as totally unworthy of
your confidence, and strike out a new path for yourselves. Much as I
respect the talents of Mr. Hey, and there is no man who thinks more
highly of his zeal and acquirements than I do, yet I cannot agree with
him in recommending the mode which he practised. It is true, that in
a very recent dislocation, before the muscles have established their fixed
contraction, that extension will succeed in returning the bone, even
although that extension be not made in the way most favourable for the
purpose. What I have said in these lectures has been the result of
considerable experience, both in public and private practice, and in the
greater number of cases the treatment has been successful, even in some
under circumstances the most unfavourable.

Of the dislocation doivnwards, or into the foramen ovale . — The






DISLOCATIONS OF THE HIP JOINT. 577



limb, in this case, is two inches longer than the other. By making
pressure with the hand on the upper and inner part of the thigh, you
can, in thin persons, distinctly feel the head of the thigh bone. There
is a flattening of the hip on that side ; the body is bent forwards, owing
to the psoas magnus and iliacus internus being put upon the stretch.
If you desire the patient to stand upright, you find that the knee is
considerably advanced towards die trunk. It is widely separated from
the other knee, and it cannot be brought to touch it without much
difficulty and pain. The foot is generally neither turned outwards or
inwards, but the toes point to the ground. In this dislocation, you do
not trust so much to the foot as a mark of it ; the increased length of
the limb, the separated knees, the bent position of the body, are such
diagnostic appearances as sufficiently point out the nature of the injury.
It generally happens when the thighs are widely separated from each
other, that theligamentum teres and capsular ligament are torn through,
and the head of the bone is situated on the obturator exteruus muscle,
at the inner and back part of the thigh.

If the accident has recently happened, the dislocation is very easily
reduced. Place the patient on his back, separate the thighs as widely
as possible, and place a girt between the pudendum and upper part of
the thigh, fix the girt to the staple in the wall, then take hold of the
ankle of the dislocated side, and draw it over the other leg, or, if the
thigh be very large, behind the sound limb, when the head of the bone
usually slips into the socket. Or the thigh might be secured by a bed-
post being received between the pudendum and the upper part of the
limb, and the leg be carried inwards across the other. But the best
plan, in general, is to fix the pelvis, by a girt passed round it, and
crossed under that which passes round the thigh, to which the pullies
are to be attached, otherwise the pelvis moves in the same direction as
the thigh. If the dislocation has existed for three or four weeks, it is
better to place the patient on his sound side, and fix the pelvis by one
bandage, and carry another under the dislocated thigh, to which the
pullies are to be affixed perpendicularly; then draw the thigh upwards,
and, at the same time, press down the knee and foot, to prevent the
lower part of the limb being carried with the thigh, and you thus use
the limb as a lever of considerable power. But, take care not to advance
the leg too much, as the head of the bone would be forced behind the
acetabulum into the ischiatic notch, from which it would be extremely
difficult to remove it.



578 DISLOCATIONS OF THE THIGII BONE.



LECTURE LXXII.

i ■

ON DISLOCATIONS OF THE THIGH BONE.

Gentlemen. — It is exceedingly curious and interesting, both to the
physiologist and to the surgeon to observe the efforts set up by nature
for the restoration of lost or injured parts ; and in no instance is this
more conspicuous than in dislocations of the thigh bone, which have
remained long unreduced. Here, gentlemen, are some beautiful speci-
mens (referring to what were on the table), in which you. may see the
accommodation of the head of the bone to the surface with which it has
been brought into contact ; here are new capsular ligaments, produced
from condensations of cellular tissue ; here are new acetabula, formed
by the pressure of the head of the bones, causing a partial absorption of
the bones on which they rest, assisted also by the deposit of matter in
the surrounding parts, resembling cartilage. In this preparation, par-
ticularly, which is a dislocation into the foramen ovale, you see the
obturator externus completely absorbed, as well as the ligament of the
foramen ovale, and its place occupied by a deposit of ossific matter.
Bone is also deposited around the foramen, so as to form a deep socket,
in which the head of the thigh bone is enclosed, and surrounding its
neck so closely, that you could not remove the bone without breaking
the edges of its new socket; this is extremely smooth on its inner
surface, and allows of very extensive motion of the joint, which appeared
to be limited only by the action of the muscles. The cartilage on the
head of the bone remained, and the shape of the head itself very little
altered; whilst the original acetabulum was nearly half filled by bone,
so that it could not have received the head of the thigh bone, even if it
had been attempted to be returned into its former situation. These
preparations show the extreme folly of attempting to reduce a dislocation
of the thigh after a certain time has been allowed to elapse; and they
also show that it is better to leave such cases to the degree of reparation
which nature will ultimately produce.

I shall now speak of the dislocation backwards , or into the ischiatic

notch.

The situation of this notch, with respect to the acetabulum in the
natural position of the pelvis, you should accurately bear in mind,
recollecting that it is placed behind the acetabulum, but, at the same
time, above its level. And it strikes me, that it is the want of
attention to this circumstance that has led some surgeons to describe
this dislocation as having occurred downwards and backwards; they
have done this from viewing the os innominatum detached from the



DISLOCATIONS OF THE THIGH BONE.



579



trunk, and not considered its obliquity when connected with it. When
the head of the bone, therefore, is thrown into this space, it is placed
backwards and upwards with respect to the acetabulum ; therefore,
although I call it the dislocation backwards, you must remember that
it is also placed a little upwards.

The head of the bone is placed on the pyriformis muscle, between the
edge of the upper part of the notch and the sacro-sciatic ligaments. Of
all tlie dislocations of the thigh this is the most difficult to detect,
because the length of the limb differs but little, and its position is not so
much changed as respects the knee and foot, as in the dislocation
upwards. It is also the most difficult to reduce, because the head of
the bone is placed behind the acetabulum, and requires to be lifted over
its edges, as well as to be drawn towards it. This dislocation may be
known by the following signs : — The limb is from half an inch to an
inch shorter than the other, but usually not more than half an inch, and
the toe rests against the ball of the great toe of the opposite foot. The
natural prominence formed by the trochanter major is lost, but it still
remains nearly at right angles with the dorsum, but it has a slight
inclination towards the acetabulum. Except in very thin persons, you
cannot feel the head of the bone, and then only by rolling it a little
forwards. The knee and foot are turned inwards, but less so than in
the dislocation upwards ; the knee is only very slightly bent, and, there-
fore, is not so much advanced as in that dislocation. The toe touches
the ground when the patient is standing, but not so the heel. Flexion
and rotation are, in a great degree, prevented, from the limb being so
firmly fixed. Here (showing a preparation) is a very good specimen of
this dislocation, which from its appearance, must have been many years
in its present situation. A new capsular ligament is formed, the original
acetabulum is entirely filled up by a ligamentous substance; but there
is no attempt made to form a new bony socket for the head of the bone.

This dislocation is produced by the knee being pressed inwards,
whilst bent at right angles with the abdomen, or whilst the trunk is
bent forwards on the thigh. The reduction is generally extremely dif-
ficult, but is best effected in the follownig way : — Let the patient be
laid on a table, on his side, and a girt passed between the pudendum
and inner part of the thigh, to fix the pelvis ; then pass a wetted roller
round the knee, and buckle the leather strap over it ; let a napkin be
carried under the upper part of the thigh ; next, bring the thigh over
the middle of the opposite one, and then begin to make your extension
with the pullies. Whilst the extension is making, an assistant should
grasp firmly the napkin at the upper part of the thigh with one hand ;
and, resting the other hand on the pelvis, he should lift the thigh as



580 DISLOCATIONS OF THE THIGH BONE.

much as possible towards the acetabulum, so as to get the head of the
bone over its edge. I have also directed a round towel to be used for
this purpose ; this is passed beneath the upper part of the thigh, and
then carried over the shoulders of an assistant, who then rested both
hands on the pelvis, and, by raising his body gently, raised the thigh
with it. If the assistant should be very short (said the Lecturer smil-
ing 1 )'). why, he might rest one foot on a chair, and place the other on
the pelvis of the patient, and might in this way, perhaps, raise the bone
as effectually as a descendant of the race of the Titans — (n laugh .) —
This dislocation has been reduced by making extension with the pullies
in a right line with the body ; and at the time this extension was made,
the trochanter major was thrust forwards with the hand. But the former
method is the most easy, and is that which I generally adopt.

Of the Dislocation on the Pubes . — This accident happens in the fol-
lowing manner : — If a person, whilst walking, puts his foot into some
unexpected hole, he throws his body suddenly backwards, to preserve
his equilibrium, and the head of the bone starts forwards on the pubes.
It is much more readily detected than any other dislocation of the
thigh. The principal marks are these : — The limb is an inch shorter
than the other, and the knee and foot are turned outwards, and cannot
be rotated inwards ; but the most striking mark of the dislocation is,
that the head of the thigh may be felt upon the pubes, above the level of
PoupaTt’s ligament, to the outer side of the femoral artery, and feels
like a hard ball there, which will readily move on rotating or bending
the knee. Easy as this dislocation is to detect, I have known three
cases in which it has been overlooked until it was too late. This could
only arise from great carelessness ; and that man really deserves the
appellation of a blockhead, who, in the present day, would allow such
an occurrence to take place.

This accident need never to be mistaken for a fracture of the neck of
the thigh bone, as the head of the bone on the pubes will point out, to
the most superficial observer, the nature of the accident. To reduce this
dislocation, you place the patient on a table, on his side ; then carry a
girt between the pudendum and the inner part of the thigh, and fix it in
a staple, a little before the line of the body. The roller is to be passed
around the thigh, and the pullies fixed as in the dislocation upwards,
and the extension is to be made in a line behind the axis of the body,
the thigh bone being drawn backwards. After this extension has been
continued some time, pass a napkin under the upper part of the thigh,
whilst an assistant, resting one hand on the pelvis, lifts the head of the
bone over the pubes and edge of the acetabulum.

From what I have had an opportunity of observing on the subject of



FRACTURES OF THE THIGH BONE-



581



dislocations, I think that the relative proportion of cases will be as fol-
lows ; — Now, if I take the number as twenty, there will be twelve on
the dorsum ilii, five in the ischiatic notch, two in the foramen ovale,
and one on the pubes. From the frequency of the occurrence of these
accidents, it is astonishing that they should have escaped the observation
of surgeons of former times, and these, too, of some eminence in
the profession. Is it not gratifying, on the other hand, to contrast
the present state of information in the profession with what it was
about fifty years ago? What should we think of a surgeon in
this metropolis, with all the opportunities of seeing diseases in the large
hospitals of this city, who doubted the existence of a dislocation
of the thigh, when we find that surgeons in the country are able im-
mediately to detect these injuries, and generally succeed in reducing
them ? Let us never forget, however, that it is to the knowledge of ana-
tomy that we are indebted to this superiority, to the study of which
we cannot devote too much attention, and to acquire an intimate know-
ledge of which we should consider no sacrifice too great, if we wish to
establish our reputation as surgeons, or humanely to discharge our
duties to mankind (Repeated and long continued applause.)

Before I proceed to describe the other dislocations, 1 shall speak of
the Fractures which happen at the upper part of the Thigh Bone.

It is not only necessary, accurately, to distinguish these accidents
from dislocations, with which they might be confounded, but also from
each other. Three distinct species of fracture, very different in their
nature and result, have been described under the indiscriminate name
of fracture through the neck of the thigh bone. It is my wish to draw
deductions from facts ; differences of opinion avail nothing in the ad-
vancement of science, unless we can appeal to facts for their support.
What I shall say to you on this point will be the result of my obser-
vations on persons who have been the subjects of these accidents, of
numerous examinations of the dead body, and of my experiments on
the lower order of animals. These accidents are much more frequent
than dislocations ; for whilst, on an average, we have only two disloca-
tions in the year, our wards are seldom without an example of fracture
of the upper part of the thigh bone. These fractures are three in num-
ber: First, where it happens through the neck of the bone entirely
within the capsular ligament ; secondly, through the neck, at its junc-
tion with the trochanter major, by which the trochanter is split, and the
upper piece is driven into it ; thirdly, a fracture through the trochanter
major, beyond its junction with the cervix.

Of Fracture within the Ligament The leg becomes from one to two

inches shorter than the other, for the connexion between the cervix and



3 d 2



582



FRACTURES OF THE THIGH HONE.



trochanter being destroyed, the trochanter is drawn up by the muscles,
as far as the ligament will permit, and it rests on the edge of the aceta-
bulum, and on the ilium. You can detect the difference in length best,
by desiring the patient to lie down on his back, when, by observing the
two malleoli, you will readily detect it. The heel generally rests in the
hollow between the malleolus internus and tendo achillis of the opposite
leg, although there is some variety in this respect. The retraction is at
first easily removed, by drawing down the limb, and you make it ap-
pear of the same length as the other, but immediately on removing
your extension, the muscles will draw it into its former position, and
this will be the case as often as you like to repeat the experiment. This
you can do until the muscles acquire a fixed contraction, which enables
them to resist an extension that is not of a powerful kind. The next
circumstance which marks this injury is the eversion of the foot and
knee ; this is caused by the power of the external rotatory muscles,
which are inserted into the thigh bone, and which are opposed but by
feeble antagonists.

On the first sight of a patient, then, there are two things that will
particularly strike your attention— the shortening of the injured limb,
with an eversion of the foot and knee, in the dislocation upwards, the
head and neck of the bone prevent the trochanter from being drawn
backwards, whilst the neck of the bone, being shortened by the frac-
ture, readily admits of it, and this is the reason why the limb is in-
verted in the one, and everted in the other. The limb has been found
everted, but it is a very rare occurrence. Some hours must elapse be-
fore this eversion becomes decisive in its character, as the muscles re-
quire some time to contract firmly, and this is the reason why it has
been mistaken for a dislocation upwards. In this fracture the patient
suffers but little pain when at rest in the recumbent posture. But on
rotation a pain is felt, from the rough end of the bone grating against
the synovial membranes lining the capsular ligament. The thigh may
be perfectly extended, but flexion is more difficult, and attended with
pain ; this is increased if the thigh be directed towards the pubes, and
lessened if carried outwards. If you should have any doubt now re-
maining as to the nature of the accident, let the patient stand by the
side of his bed, supported by an assistant, and you will have all the
appearances which I have before named present ; and if he attempt to
bear on the injured limb, it will produce much pain, which is occasioned
by the psoas magnus and iliacus internus being put on the stretch, as
well as by the pressure of the roughened surface of the bone, on the
inner part of the capsular ligament. A crepitus is also discoverable,
when the limb is drawn down, so as to be of the same length as the op-



FRACTURES OF THE THIGH BONE.



583



posite one, and then rotated, but not so when the patient is lying on his
back, with the limb shortened. It occurs more frequently in women
than in men. This probably may be accounted for by the more ho-
rfrontal position of the neck of the bone, and the comparative feeble-
ness of constitution in the former. It occurs in persons of advanced
age, and it is a mistake to talk of its happening in young persons.
Although I have been now thirty-nine years at Guy’s and St. Tho-
mas’s Hospitals, and have had more than my share of the practice of
the metropolis during that time, I have seen more than two hundred
and twenty-five cases of fracture of the neck of the thigh bone, within
the capsular ligament, yet I have only known two persons in whom
this accident occurred under fifty years of age. This fracture, then, rarely
happens under fifty years of age, and dislocation seldom at a more
advanced period. But the most common period at which fracture
occurs is between fifty and eighty.

The reason why the bone breaks so much more readily in age, is, that
there is a peculiar process taking place in age, which is producing an
entire alteration in the structure of the head and neck of the bone. The
natural changes which thus take place in the bones, in different periods
of life, are remarkable; they increase in bulk and weight in youth,
they remain stationary during the adult period, and become lighter and
softer in the more advanced stages of life. You may cut the bones of
old persons' with a penknife, which you could not do at the adult period.
The neck of the bone undergoes an interstitial absorption, by which it
becomes shortened and altered in its relation with the shaft of the bone;
so that the head of the bone, instead of being above the level of the tro-
chanter, sinks almost to its root. Indeed, the bones of an old person
may be readily distinguished in the skeleton from those of a person at
the middle period of life.

The slightest causes often produce fractures in this state of the bone.
The way in which they usually happen in London is, from the person
slipping off the foot pavement, and though it is only the descent of a
few inches, the unexpected shock acting perpendicularly on the cervix,
with the advantage of a lever, produces a fracture. The patient im-
mediately falls, and the accident is very frequently improperly attributed
to this circumstance. Even turning suddenly round has produced it.

The union of this fracture has been the cause of much difference of
opinion. It has been said that these fractures will unite like fractures
in other parts of the body, by bone ; but I have taught for the last
thirty years, in these lectures, that, as a general principle, fractures of
the neck of the thigh bone, of the patella, olecranon, coronoid process
of the ulna and condyles of the os humeri, unite by ligament, and not



584



FRACTURES OF THE THIGH BONE.



by bone. In all the examinations which I have made of transverse
fractures of the cervix femoris within the capsule, I have had my opi-
nions confirmed, as I have not met with a single instance in which bony
union had taken place. I would not maintain its impossibility, but
what I wish to be understood to say is, that if it ever does happen, it is
an extremely rare occurrence, and that I have never met with a single
example of it. Whilst, to support a contrary opinion, only a single
instance has been produced, having the shadow of plausibility ; and in
this case the same appearances were found in both the thigh bones, and
even these resembled what 1 have often observed in the dead body,
arising from a softened state of the bones.

There are several reasons which may be assigned for the want of ossi-
fic union in the transverse fracture of the cervix within the ligament.
The first is a want of the proper apposition of the fractured ends of the
bone. It is scarcely possible to preserve the parts in apposition even
for a few hours, and the slightest change of position produces an instant
contraction of the large and powerful muscles passing from the pelvis
to the thigh, so that the ends of the bone become immediately displaced.
This is also the case in fractures of the patella, where, notwithstanding
all our efforts to prevent the retraction of the muscles, it very seldom
happens that we can succeed in supporting a complete approximation
of the bones. The second reason for a want of bony union is, the want
of pressure of one bone on the other. Even if the limb were preserved
at its proper length, and admitting the capsular ligament not to be torn,
this circumstance would operate to prevent an ossific union. There is
a large quantity of synovial fluid secreted into the joint ; this distends
the ligament, and entirely prevents the contact of the bones. After a
time this fluid becomes absorbed, but not until the inflammatory pro-
cess has ceased, and ligamentous matter has been effused into the joint
from the surface of the synovial membrane. That cause which so
powerfully conduces to the union of other fractures is wanting here, viz.
the pressure which the muscles produce on the broken extremities of
bones ; for if two broken bones overlap each other on that side on whicli
they are pressed together, there will be an abundance of ossific matter
deposited ; but on the opposite side, on which there is no pressure
exerted, scarcely any change will be observed. But the third and prin-
cipal reason is, the almost entire absence of ossific union in the
head of the bone when detached from its cervix. The principal
supply of blood to the head of the bone being derived from the
ligamentum teres, which has only a few minute vessels ramifying
from it on the bone, the natural supply of blood for the neck and
head of the bone is derived from the periosteum ; and when the neck



FRACTURES OF THE THIGH BONE. 585

is fractured, and the periosteum torn through, the means of ossific action
are necessarily cut off. No deposit of cartilage or bone, as in other
fractures, is produced, but there is a deposition of ligamentous matter
covering the surface of the cancellated structure. On dissection of these
accidents you find that the cancelli are rendered firm and smooth by
friction, as in other bones which rub on each other when their articular
cartilages are absorbed. Portions of bone remain attached by ligament,
or are loose and floating in the joint, covered by ligamentous matter ;
but these do not excite inflammation any more than similar portions
which are found in the knee or in the elbow joints. The capsular liga-
ment and the synovial membrane are very much thickened from the in-
flammation which they have undergone, and are therefore very much
strengthened. This membrane is sometimes separated from the frac-
tured portions, so as to form a thick band, passing from the fractured
edges of the cervix to the head of the bone. Ligamentous matter
passes also from the cancellated structure of the head to the neck, thus
uniting, by a flexible material, the one broken portion of bone to another.
It appears then, as a general principle, that ossific union is not pro-
duced. I have seen the two preparations of Mr. Stanley, at Bartholo-
mew’s, which were supposed to be specimens of that union, but these
have the same appearances on each side : now it is very probable that
age or disease might produce similar effects in both bones, but it would
be very difficult to suppose that accideuts would do so. In experiments
which I have made on animals in perfect health, the union was always
by ligament. One of the best proofs, however, is a preparation of Mr.
Langstaff’s in which the bone is fractured within and without the cap-
sular ligament ; that without is united by bone, and that within the
capsule is united by ligament. I have often seen that appearance in
the necks of the thigh bones of old people, supposed to represent the
union of a fracture through the cervix by bone. But the truth is, that
it is occasioned by the absorption of the neck of the bone, in the way I
have before described, allowing of the descent of the head of the bone
just opposite the root of the trochanter major. Here, gentlemen, is the
thigh bone of an aged female (holding it up to the class), in which this
change has taken place ; now, where is the neck of this thigh bone ?
Can you see it ? No, I am sure you cannot, for it has gone to the
tomb of all the Capulets.

I must defer speaking of the treatment of these accidents until the
next lecture.



586



FRACTURES OF



LECTURE LXXIII.

ON FRACTURES OF THE NECK OF THE THIGH RONE.

Gentlemen, I shall now speak of the treatment of fractures of the
neck of the thigh bone, within the capsular ligament. Numerous
measures have been adopted for the purpose of producing an ossific
union of this fracture, both by myself and others, but all to no
purpose. Disappointed in the attempt, and finding the patient's health
suffer from the necessary confinement, what I now direct to be done, is,
that a pillow be placed under the limb, throughout the whole length,
and another be put under the knee, and the limb be in this way extended
for ten days or a fortnight, until the inflammation has subsided. Then
let the patient get out of bed, and sit on a high chair, to prevent the
limb being too much bent, afterwards walk with crutches, bearing gently
at first on the foot, then increase the pressure more and more, until
the ligament becomes thickened, and the power of the muscles increased.
Next, let him use a shoe with a high heel, which would very much
diminish his lameness. The patients treated in this way, as you
have an opportunity of observing, walk after a few days with crutches,
then with a stick, and in a few months requires no additional support.
But in all cases in which the slightest doubt may be entertained, whe-
ther the fracture be within or without the capsule, it is much better to
treat them as if they were external to the capsule, and which fractures
wiil unite by bone.

Of Fractures external to the Capsule , and when the neck of the bone
is driven into the cancellated structure of the trochanter major ; this
accident is marked by the leg being from half to three quarters of an
inch shorter than the other. The foot and toe are everted, much pain
is felt at the hip, and on the inner and upper part of the thigh, and the
usual rotundity of the joint is lost. The first diagnostic mark of this
fracture is, that it happens in the young, and in persons under fifty
years of age; although I have known it later. But, if the symptoms
which I have before described, are seen at any age under fifty, it will
generally be found to be a fracture external to the ligament, and is capa-
ble of union by ossific matter. Vet it must also be remembered, that
this fracture may occur in more advanced age, and therefore requires
care in the discrimination of the two. The second sign of this accident
is, that it is usually the result of some very severe injury, as blows
received on the part, from falling upon some projecting body, or from
heavy carriages passing over the limb ; whilst the fracture within the
capsule occurs from any slight cause. It may be known, in the third



THE NECK OF THE THIGH BONE.



587



place, by the crepitus, which is produced by a slight motion of the
limb ; and it is not necessary, in this accident, to draw the leg down to
feel the crepitus, as the retraction is not so great as in the former acci-
dent. There is also usually great extravasation into the surrounding
parts, and this swelling is quickly followed by great tenderness to the
touch. There is also violent pain produced upon slight motion of the
joint, followed by a high degree of constitutional irritation; and many
months elapse before the patient recovers a proper use of the limb. The
principle to be attended to in the treatment of this fracture is, the
approximation of the bones by pressing the trochanter towards the
acetabulum ; at the same time preserving the length of the limb, by
applying a roller around the foot of the injured leg, and binding it
firmly to the sound one ; thus making the sound limb afford support,
and act as a splint to the fractured one. A broad leather strap should
be buckled around the pelvis, and include the trochanter major, so as
to press the fractured portions of the bone firmly together; and the best
position in which you can place the limb is in a straight line with the
body. I have also known cases do very well where the patient has been
laid on his back on a mattress, and the thigh brought over the double
inclined plane, which may be very easily made by three boards ; one
passing from the tuberosity of the ischium to the foot, and the two
others having a joint in the middle, by which you can increase the
elevation of the angle as may be required ; over these a pillow should
be thrown. A long splint should be then placed on the outer side of
the thigh, fastened above with a strong strap around the pelvis, and
secured below by another strap round the knee, so as to prevent the
knee being moved from its position. This must be persevered in for
several weeks, and the patient may then be allowed to rise from his bed,
if the attempt do not give much pain. He must still, however, wear the
strap around the pelvis; and he thus recovers, with a useful but
shortened limb.

Of Fractures through the Trochanter Major . — Fractures through the
trochanter major are generally oblique, and they may happen without
any injury being at the same time done to the neck of the bone. They
happen at any period of life, and are marked by the following symp-
toms : the limb is very little, and sometimes not at all shortened; there
is a numbness in the foot; the patient cannot turn in bed without
assistance, and the attempt is productive of great pain. The trochanter
is sometimes drawn forwards towards the ilium, sometimes it falls to-
wards the tuberosity of the ischium, but is generally widely separated
from that portion of the bone remaining in connexion with the neck.
The foot is greatly everted, and the patient cannot sit, as any attempt



588 DISLOCATIONS OF THE KNEE JOINT.

to do so produces very great pain. You can feel a crepitus with great
difficulty, if the detached portion of the trochanter be either much fallen,
or much drawn forwards. This fracture unites very firmly, and the
patient recovers a good use of the limb.

This accident then, it appears, may be easily known by the sepa-
ration of the bone at the fractured part, so that the finger may be placed
between the fractured portions ; by the crepitus, felt by putting the
fingers on the trochanter when the knee is advanced ; by the upper por-
tion of the trochanter not following the motions of the lower, and of the
shaft of the bone; and when at the lower part of the trochanter, by the
great over-lapping and distension ; it is followed by an excessive depo-
sit of callus.

The treatment of this accident is much the same as that of the
former : you should pass a wide bandage round the pelvis, and keep the
limb extended, and the patient in the horizontal position, in the way
before pointed out. Sometimes the bone is fractured just beneath the
trochanter, and the deformity produced by this accident is very great,
which is caused by the upper end of the bone being drawn upwards by
the action of the psoas magnus and iliacus interims. The proper way
to treat it is by raising the thigh over an inclined plane, and elevating
the trunk to about an angle of 45 deg. In this manner you bring the
ends of the bone in apposition, but you should not attempt to depress
the upper end of the bone, as it only increases the patient’s sufferings to
no purpose.

I shall next speak of

DISLOCATIONS OF THE KNEE JOINT ;

And, first, of Dislocations of the Patella. The patella may be dis-
located in three directions — outwards, inwards, and upwards.

The bone is most frequently thrown on the external condyle, and
produces there a great projection ; the patient is also unable to bend the
knee, and these circumstances readily point out the nature of the injury.
It is most frequently produced by a person falling with his knees turned
inwards, and his foot at the same time turned outwards, and the action
of the muscles in the attempt made to prevent the fall draws the patella
over the external condyle of the femur. It generally happens in those
persons who have naturally a little inclination of the knee inwards. The
dislocation on the internal condyle is less frequent, and happens from a
blow on the outer side of the patella, received in a fall on some project-
ing body. To reduce either of these dislocations, you are to place the
patient in the recumbent posture, and let the leg be raised, by lifting it
at the heel, by which you relax the extensor muscles of the thigh in the



DISLOCATIONS OF THE KNEE JOINT. 589

greatest possible degree ; you then press on that edge of the bone which
is furthest from the articulation, and this raises the inner edge of the
bone over the condyle of the femur, and it is directly drawn into its
proper position by the action of the muscles. Evaporating lotions of
spirit and water are to be employed, and afterwards, say in two or three
days, bandages should be applied.

In the dislocation of the patella upwards, the ligamentum patellae is
torn through, and the patella is drawn on the upper and fore part of the
thigh bone. The marks of this accident are at once decisive ; for, be-
sides the easy motion of the patella from side to side, a depression is
felt above the tubercle of the tibia, from the laceration of the ligament.
The patient loses the power of bearing on the limb, and a considerable
degree of inflammation usually succeeds. You should, in the treatment
of this case, apply leeches, and afterwards evaporating lotions, from four
to seven days ; then apply a roller round the foot and leg, and keep
them completely extended by a splint behind the knee ; then buckle a
leather strap above the knee, and to this let another strap be fastened,
which is to be passed under the foot, and buckled to the opposite side of
the circular strap. The bone is in this way drawn down to the ruptured
ligament, and a union consequently takes place. The patient should,
at the same time, continue in the sitting posture, so as to relax the
extensors of the leg which are inserted into the patella.

Of Dislocations of the Tibia at the Knee Joint. — These dislocations
are four : two complete, and two incomplete. In the dislocation inwards,
the tibia projects on the inner side of the joint, and the condyle of the
femur'rests on the external semilunar cartilage. The tibia is sometimes
thrown on the outer side of the joint, the condyle of the femur being
placed on the inner semilunar cartilage, and the deformity produced is
just as much as in the dislocation outwards. The tibia is sometimes
dislocated forwards ; the external marks of the injury are these: the
tibia is raised, the thigh bone is depressed, and thrown rather to one
side, sometimes so much so as to compress the popliteal artery. In the
dislocation backwards, the limb is shortened, the condyles of the femur
project, and there is a depression of the ligament of the patella, and the
leg is bent forwards. Each of these dislocations may be reduced by
simple extension, for, as soon as you remove the surfaces of the bones
from each other, the muscles give them the direction necessary to be
restored to their proper situations.

Partial Dislocations of the Femur from the Semilunar Cartilages . —
In these cases, where the secretion of the synovia into the joint lias been
very much increased, the ligaments become so much relaxed, as to
allow the cartilages to glide on the surface of the tibia, especially if the

3 E



590



FRACTURES OF THE KNEE JOINT.



edge of the cartilage is pressed by the thigli bone. This accident was
first accurately described by the late Mr. Hey, of Leeds, who was a
scientific and successful practitioner, and had the advancement of the
profession at heart. The most common cause of this accident is the
person striking his toe against some projecting body, when the foot is
everted. He immediately feels pain in the knee, and it cannot be com-
pletely extended. I have also known it happen from a sudden twist
inwards, when the foot is turned out. The manner in which the acci-
dent happens is as follows : The ligaments uniting the semilunar

cartilages to the head of the tibia become relaxed, the cartilages are
easily pushed from their situations by the condyles of the femur, which
therefore come into contact with the head of the tibia. When the limb
is attempted to be extended, the edges of the semilunar cartilages
prevent it. Now the mode of restoring the parts to their natural position
is clear, namely, to bind the limb back as far as possible, by which you
remove the pressure made by the thigh bone, and this enables the car-
tilage to slip into its place, and the condyles of the femur are again
received on the semilunar cartilages. This accident is particularly liable
to happen again, and the return of it is best prevented by a bandage
made with a piece of linen having four straps attached to it, and these
are bound tightly above and below the patella.

Of Compound Dislocations of the Knee Joint , I have only seen one
example. This required an immediate amputation ; and, it is probable
that in all these accidents, unless the wound is very small, so as to
allow of its ready closure and adhesion, that a similar practice will be
necessary.

I shall next speak of

FRACTURES OF THE KNEE JOINT.

And, first, of Fractures of the Patella . — The patella is generally
broken transversely, but sometimes longitudinally.

In the first of these the upper part is drawn from the lower by the
action of the muscles inserted into it, whilst the lower part remains
fixed by its ligament. The degree of separation depends on the lace-
ration of the ligament. The accident is at once known by the depression
between the two portions of bone into which you may put your fingers,
and by the upper part of the bone moving readily on the lower and fore-
part of the thigh. The power of extending the limb is also lost ; and
the knee bends forwards from a loss of action of the extensor muscles.
Soon after the accident, extravasation takes place on the fore-part of
the joint, arid produces a livid appearance, but this is removed by ab-
sorption in a few days. There is afterwards considerable effusion from



FRACTURES OF THE KNEE JOINT.



■391



inflammation into the surrounding parts. It happens either from blows
on the patella, or from the action of the muscles. The union of this
fracture is generally by ligament, whether the separation of the bones
be great or little. But still the principle which should guide you in
the treatment is, to make that ligament as short as possible. If the
upper end of the bone be retracted by the muscles, the ligament con-
necting the bones is long, the patient walks very lame, and is liable to
fall and break the other patella.

When called to this accident, you should place the patient on a
mattress, extend the limb on a well-padded splint, which is placed
behind the thigh and leg. The patient should be raised as much as he
can to the sitting posture, to relax the rectus ; an evaporating lotion of
white wash should then he applied, and the heel should also be raised
towards the trunk, to bring up the lower portion of the patella. If
there should be much inflammation, existing for a day or two, leeches
must be applied, and an evaporating lotion continued ; and, when the
tension has subsided, you may apply your bandages. The mode gene-
rally adopted is, to pass a roller from the foot to the knee, to prevent
the swelling of the leg ; then rollers are applied above and below the
joint, under which a piece of broad tape is passed on each side, which
crosses the rollers at right angles, and, by taking these, the upper
portion is brought down towards the lower. But the plan which I like
best is this : — Buckle a leather strap around the thigh, above the frac-
tured portion, and from this another strap should be passed beneath the
foot, the leg being kept extended, and the foot raised : this strap is
brought up on the other side of the knee, and buckled to the circular
strap above the knee ; a roller should also he applied on the leg. After
keeping the limb in this position five weeks, you may begin to use
slight passive motion, taking great care, however, not to do too much,
a3 you would separate the ligamentous union which had been formed.
You may increase this from day to day, until the limb can be bent
perfectly. The smallest distance at which I have known it to unite is
half an inch, and the greatest distance seven inches ; a moderate dis-
tance is one or two inches. It sometimes happens that, from the degree
of separation, the patient loses the command over the motions of the
leg ; and, in such cases, you must exercise the extensor muscles by
letting the patient swing his legs over a table, in order to accommodate
the muscles to their new line of action. Unless this be done, or passive
motion be used, the patient can never recover the use of the limb.

In the longitudinal fracture , the bone also unites by ligament. I
have seen it unite by bone, but it was rather a fissure than a fracture.
The treatment v/ill be to apply leeches and evaporating lotions ; in a



592 DISLOCATIONS OF THE ANKLE JOINT.

few days a roller should be applied, and then a laced cap, with a strap
to buckle above and below the knee, with a pad on eacli side of the
patella, to bring the parts as nearly as possible into contact.

Compound Fractures of the Patella are very dangerous accidents,
frequently proving fatal to life, from the violent degree of constitutional
irritation which they occasion. They are generally recovered from by
the following treatment : — Bring the integuments together by a small
suture, apply adhesive straps round the knee, evaporating lotions on the
fore-part, and the limb kept extended by a splint passed beneath.
Whenever a joint is laid open, except by a valvular opening, that
wound is difficult to heal from the flowing of the synovia, and is, there-
fore, very difficult to treat; but, if the integuments be brought together
by a suture, the parts beneath often heal by the adhesive process. The
suture should not be kept in more than a week.

In Fractures of the Condyles of the Femur , extending into the joint,
which are known by the great swelling that takes place into the joint,
by the crepitus and the deformity, you should place the limb on a pil-
low in the extended position, for then the head of the tibia keeps the
extremities of the bone in their places. You should apply evaporating
lotions, and leeches, if necessary, to subdue the inflammation^ and then
mould a piece of stout pasteboard, moistened, round the knee, and bind
it on with a roller. This, when dry, adapts itself equally to the dif-
ferent surfaces, and forms a most excellent splint to retain the fractured
extremities of the bones. After five weeks you should commence pas-
sive motion, or otherwise anchylosis will take place. The same obser-
vations apply to fractures of the head of the tibia.

or THE DISLOCATIONS OF THE ANKLE JOINT.

This articulation is well protected by numerous strong ligaments ;
the union of the fibula particularly is so firm to the tibia and the tarsal
bones, that it generally happens that the bone will rather break than
the ligaments give way. I have seen the tibia dislocated in three direc-
tions— inwards, forwards, and outwards ; and a fourth, backwards, is
sometimes said to occur. The dislocation inwards is most frequent.
The foot is thrown outwards, and its inner edge rests upon the ground :
the internal malleolus projects so much against the integuments as to
threaten their laceration. The foot easily rotates on its axis : there is
also a depression above the malleolus ext.ernus, attended with great
pain ; and about three inches above the lower end of the fibula a cre-
pitus may be felt. This accident generally happens from a person
jumping from a considerable height, or from running violently with the
toe turned outwards, the foot being suddenly checked in its motion



DISLOCATIONS OF THE ANKLE JOINT. 593

whilst the body is carried forwards on the foot, and the ligaments on
the inner side of the ankle give way. By grasping the leg about three
inches above the ankle, and freely rotating the foot, a crepitus of the
fibula will be perceived. To reduce the dislocation, place the patient
on a mattress on his injured side, and bend the leg at right angles with
the thigh, so as to relax the gastrocnemii ; let an assistant grasp the
foot, and gradually draw it in a line with the leg. You should, at the
same time, fix the thigh and press the tibia downwards, to force it on
the articulating surface of the astragalus. After the reduction, let the
limb remain on its outer side in the bent position, with the foot well sup-
ported : a many-tailed bandage should be applied, and kept wet with
the spirit wash. The patient may leave his bed and walk on crutches
at the end of five weeks ; friction and passive motion should be used at
the end of eight weeks, and twelve weeks will elapse before he has the
perfect motion of the joint.

Of the Dislocation forwards Here the foot appears much shortened

and fixed, and the toes pointed to the ground. The lower end of the
tibia forms a hard swelling on the middle of the tarsus. The heel ap-
pears lengthened, and there is a projection before the tendo-achillis. On
dissection, it is found that the tibia rests on the navicular and internal
cuneiform bones, the fibula is broken, and carried forwards at the side of
the tibia, and it is fractured about three inches above its malleolus. It
happens from the body falling backwards whilst the foot is confined, or
from a person jumping from a carriage in rapid motion, with the toe
pointed forwards. In reducing this dislocation you should lay the pa-
tient in bed on his back, an assistant should grasp the thigh at its lower
part, and draw it towards the body, whilst another pulls the foot in a
line from the leg, and you then push the tibia back, to bring it into its
proper place ; attending to the same rule of relaxation of the muscles
and the after-treatment as in the former dislocation. The patient
should afterwards rest the leg on the heel, apply splints on each side of
the leg, with foot-pieces to support the foot at right angles with the
leg. In five weeks you may allow the patient to get up, and use passive
motion, as the fibula will, by that time, have united. In the partial
dislocation forwards , the tibia rests half on the os naviculare and half
on the astragalus ; the fibula is broken, and there is not any consider-
able projection of the heel. The toe is pointed downwards, and there
is great difficulty in putting the foot flat upon the ground. The heel is
drawn up, and the foot is, in a great degree, immoveable. The treat-
ment is the same as in the complete dislocation forwards.

Of the Dislocation outwards. — This is the most dangerous of the
three, as it is produced by greater violence, and is attended with more

3 E 2



594



ON COMPOUND FRACTURES.



laceration of ligament, and more contusion of the integuments. The
foot is thrown inwards, and its outer edge rests upon the ground. The
malleolus projects very much, and forms such a decided prominence
that the nature of the injury cannot be mistaken. The toes and foot
are pointed downwards. In this accident the malleolus internus is
obliquely fractured, and it happens from the wheel of a carriage pass-
ing over the leg, or by the foot being twisted in jumping or falling.
To reduce this dislocation, you place the patient on his back, bend the
thigh at right angles with the body, and the leg at right angles with the
thigh ; let the foot be held firmly by one assistant, and the thigh grasped
under the ham by another ; then extend the foot in a line with the leg,
and press the tibia inwards towards the astragalus. The limb should be
laid on its outer side, resting on splints with foot-pieces, and a pad
should be placed on the fibula, above the outer ankle, extending a little
way up the bone, so as to support that part of the leg. The after-treat-
ment will be the same as in the former cases. Passive motions should
be used in six weeks.

Compound Dislocations of the Ankle Joints may take place in the
same direction as the simple, and the bones and ligaments suffer in the
same way. Great local inflammation and constitutional disturbance
attend this accident ; the cause of these is the wound which is made
into the joint, and the great efforts required to repair it. The principle
to be observed is this : — Close the wound as completely as possible, to
assist uature in the adhesive process by which the wound is to be closed,
thus rendering suppuration and granulation less necessary for the union
of the opened joint. The reduction is to be effected in the same manner
as I have before described in simple dislocations. Apply a little lint,
dipped in blood, to the wound, put on a many-tailed bandage, which is
to be kept wet with spirits of wine and water, and the limb should rest
on its outer side. But in the dislocation outwards it is best to keep the
foot on the heel, with a splint and foot-piece on the outer and inner side
of the leg. The knee should be. slightly bent, and care taken that the
foot does not become pointed.

LECTURE LXXIV.

ON COMPOUND FRACTURES.

After some operations had been performed at the theatre cf Guy’s
Hospital, Sir Astley presented himself to the pupils, and said that he
intended to take advantage of the present opportunity of their being to-
gether, to make some remarks on compound fractures, to describe the



ON COMPOUND FRACTURES. 595

mode in which they become united, and to detail their treatment under
common and under adverse circumstances.

A Compound Fracture is that in which there is an external wound
communicating with the broken extremities of the bone. Large wounds
may occur at the same time with fractures, but unless these commu-
nicate with the bone, they are not called compound fractures. The im-
mediate result of the fracture is the escape of the extravasated blood,
which, in simple fracture, becomes absorbed. The effect this injury
produces on the constitution is to set up a violent re-action, so as to
bring about a restoration of the injured part. The degree of this effort
of the system will very much depend on the manner in which the acci-
dent is treated; and I should say, that it was an important injury, or
otherwise, according to the plan of treatment which is pursued. For if
you are careful in the management of the case, you may procure adhe-
sion of the external wound, and thus reduce the accident to the state of
a simple fracture. The mode of union is ultimately the same; but in
one kind of injury ossific matter is deposited in cartilage without a sup-
purative process, and in the other with it. If you do not procure an
union by adhesion, it is brought about by granulation, and in the fol-
lowing way : — The blood, which is at first poured out in consequence
of the division of the vessels of the medullary membrane and the perios-
teum, instead of being confined in the surrounding structures, passes off
by the external wound ; yet it must be remembered that this effused
blood has.no share in producing union of the ends of the bone, as it be-
comes, after a few days, entirely absorbed. Next, there is a fluid poured
out between the periosteum and the bone, which separates the perios-
teum from the surface of the bone for about an inch or an inch and a
half beyond the place where the bone is fractured. This fluid does not
cause a laceration of the vessels of the periosteum, but rather an elonga-
tion of them. Now here is the difference between the simple and com-
pound fracture ; for, in the former, the fluid, after accumulating for a
day or two, becomes in a great measure taken up by the absorbents, and
adhesive matter is poured out in its stead ; but in the latter, a suppu-
rative process is established, and granulations arise from the broken
surfaces. In these granulations cartilage becomes deposited, and con-
tinues to be formed for some time ; the discharge of pus gradually
diminishes, and in compound fracture cartilage continues to be formed
until about the twentieth day. It is deposited between the internal
surface of the periosteum and the external surface of the bone. At the
place where bones are brought into contact, the periosteum becomes
absorbed, and cartilage is deposited between them, in which patches of



506



ON COMPOUND FRACTURES.



bony matter are formed, and these, when completed, are covered by an
extension of the original periosteum.

The cause of the non-union of fractures is the want of approxima-
tion ; for if the fractured ends are not brought into contact, the perios-
teum is not raised, the cartilage that forms does not cover the extremi-
ties of the bones, and the protruding portions are removed by the ab-
sorbents, so that the process of union only goes on in those surfaces of
bone which are lying in contact.

Under the granulations arising from the cancellated structure, carti-
lage is also found, and about the twelfth day in simple, and from the
seventeenth to the twentieth day in compound fracture, there are bony
patches deposited in the cartilage ; it is by the accumulation of these
patches that ossific union takes place. A compound fracture is neces-
sarily slower in its progress towards recovery, from the causes just ex-
plained, than a simple fracture ; and the union is frequently retarded
by exfoliations of bone, which will often take up a tedious time to sepa-
rate, and keep up considerable constitutional irritation. Three months
may be considered a short time for the union of a compound fracture
to take place ; sometimes the accident is not recovered from in nine
months, and occasionally, not even in twelve.

I shall now proceed to speak of their treatment under common cir-
cumstances.

Reduce the bones as speedily as you can, and this may be very easily
done by relaxing the muscles acting upon the limb. Bring them as
nearly into apposition as possible, and if there be slight hemorrhage, do
not be searching for a small vessel, but place a little lint over the wound,
and by making gentle pressure on it, you may easily suppress the
hemorrhage. I shall have some further remarks to make on this sub-
ject, when speaking of the difficulties sometimes attending these acci-
dents. Next bring the integuments as neatly over the parts as you
can, and dip a dossil of lint in the blood, and put it on the surface of
the wound, which irritates the least of any application I know of, and
appears to approach the nearest of any other to the natural covering of
the parts. In this way the wound unites by the adhesive process, and
the union of the bone goes on as in simple fracture, and is cured in one-
fourth part of the time which would be required if the wound were
allowed to be filled by granulations. This being the principal object,
you should always aim at it, unless the fracture be accompanied with
severe contusion of the soft parts, when you must apply a poultice in
order to facilitate the discharge from the wound, and promote the sepa-
ration of the parts to be removed. As, for example, a wound caused



ON COMPOUND FRACTURES.



597



by a heavy body passing over the limb, the parts must slough, and
therefore it would be useless to attempt to procure an union by adhe-
sion. If the wound communicating with the fracture be caused by the
ends of the bone or any sharp instrument, you may generally succeed in
procuring an adhesion. But do not apply adhesive plaster, as it fre-
quently produces erysipelas on the edge of the wound, and on this
account I have latterly put a bit of lint on the edges of the wound,
after extirpating the female breast, and the adhesive plaster over it.
Then apply the many-tailed bandage loosely, so that it may give way
to the tension that follows ; you should also apply some evaporating
lotion, and the material of which the bandage is made is a very good
thing for retaining the fluid for the purpose.

Splints should afterwards be put on ; those made of wood are the
best, and one should be put on each side of the limb. Do not apply
the splints tightly at first, so as to cause pain, but see that they are well
padded, and the bones nicely adjusted. In a few days it often happens
that inflammation arises, and a discharge of pus follows, when the lint
which was at first applied should be partly removed, and the matter
allowed to discharge. If the matter should be small in quantity after
you have let it out, replace the lint carefully, and do not apply a poul-
tice, but continue the use of the cold wash. If, on the other hand, the
discharge of matter be considerable, or if it be a contused wound, with
a tendency to slough, then you should apply fomentations and poul-
tices, and heal the wound by a granulating process.

The position of the limb may be just the same as in simple fracture ;
with this exception, that if the suppurative process should be set up,
the wound will require dressing, and therefore it will be necessary to
have the limb in a convenient position for that purpose.

If the leg be fractured, it should be bent, and laid on its outer side,
for if it rest on the heel, then the fractured part is without support,
and it requires very great attention to prevent deformity of the
limb. If, while the leg is lying on its side, you allow the toe to
fall, the foot becomes everted, and the patient seldom recovers a useful
limb. >

If the fracture is in the thigh, it should be placed over a double in-
clined plane, with a splint on each side ; that on the outside should
reach from the trochanter beyond the knee ; and both in this and the
former fracture you should keep the ball of the great toe in a line with
the inner side of the patella. I do not like the extended position of
the limb, because the muscles are put upon the stretch, and there is
danger of a shortening of the limb ensuing. This was the practice
about fifty years ago. The lateral position of the limb, asrecommended



.598



ON COMPOUND FRACTURES.



by Mr. Pott, I also object to, for two reasons; the first is, that it is
almost impossible to keep the toes from falling ; the consequence is,
that the foot is turned out ; and 1 have seen several patients treated by
Mr. Pott for this accident, who had this deformity. The second objec-
tion to the practice is, that the limb, from being kept long in the ex-
tended position, causes the motion of the knee joint to be very much
diminished, and there is great difficulty subsequently in restoring it.

In compound fracture of the humerus , let the arm hang by the side,
with the fore-arm and hand very slightly supported in a sling, so that
its weight may not be entirely taken off the humerus, for it will tend
materially to preserve the apposition of the ends of the bone. Do not
keep the patient in bed, for in the recumbent posture the arm is gene-
rally placed across the chest, the arm is put on the twist, and the frac-
ture unites badly.

A compound fracture of the femur generally does better than a com-
pound fracture of the leg, because the bone is so much surrounded by
muscle that the wound made is much more easily closed, and is not
therefore followed by the same degree of suppuration.

The humerus generally does well when fractured, on the same account.
The worst cases are those of the fore-arm and leg, from inflammation
and sloughing of the tendons in the one, and the superficial nature of
the covering of the bone in the other.

The constitutional treatment required in these Occidents will be regu-
lated by the force of the symptoms ; but there are a few circumstances
which I consider important for you to become acquainted with. If the
patient be young and plethoric, take blood from the arm sufficient to
allay the constitutional suffering, but do not give purgatives, as they
very much disturb the patient, and add to the irritation, by the necessity
which there is of his being frequently moved. Nothing is so bad in the
treatment of compound fracture as the frequent changing of the positions
and dressings of the patient ; it is a state of rest which is necessary for
the recovery of the parts, and therefore, the less they are disturbed the
better. Give opium to quiet the irritation, and give also, at the same
time, the saline mixture, with the liquor antim. tartarizat. to keep up
the secretion of the skin.

I shall next speak of the difficulties sometimes met with in the treat-
ment of these accidents ; and, first, of the difficulty which now and then
exists in the reduction of the bone, which occasionally arises from a
portion of skin being nipped under the projecting extremity of the bone.
When you try to extend the limb, you find you cannot bring the skin
into its place. If this projecting portion of the bone be not large, make
an incision through the integuments, and turn them on one side suffi-



ON COMPOUND FRACTURES. -509

ciently to reduce the bone, and afterwards try to unite the parts by the
adhesive process.

When you experience any difficulty in the reduction of a fracture
which is very oblique , do not divide the integuments, as the probabili-
ties are that the periosteum has been injured on the exposed bone, and
that it would afterwards separate by a tedious process of exfoliation ;
the vitality of the part is very low, and the wound necessary to be made
to replace the bone would be a large one. But what I advise you to
do is, to saw off the sharp projections of the bone at the extremities of
the fractured portions, and then carefully replace the bone in its proper
situation. The muscles will draw the ends of the bone together, even
if it be shortened. Do not adopt this practice, however, where there are
two bones, and one is not fractured, for if the broken or the sawn sur-
faces be not brought into contact, no ossific union can take place. I
know that some cases have been published by a very ingenious surgeon,
in which it was supposed that ossific union had taken place between the
separated portions of the tibia ; but I think that this union was effected
by a tough ligamento-cartilaginous material, and not by bone.

If the bone be very much shattered , and several pieces be detached
and loose, remove them, but with the greatest degree of care, so as to
avoid irritating the wound more than is absolutely necessary. If these
portions of bone be not removed, they will produce excessive irritation,
and will very much retard the healing of the wound by frequent exfo-
liations. But if the pieces be large, do not detach them, for if they be
connected by periosteum they will again unite ; or if there be one large
piece, and the periosteum on it is entire, let it remain.

Compound fractures are often attended with hemorrhage from large
arteries , which have been wounded by the broken extremities of the
bone. It was formerly the practice to amputate in these accidents,
whenever any vessel of importance was wounded, under the supposition
that the injury could not be repaired, and that gangrene would, in all
probability happen. But I have seen so many limbs saved, even when
the principal artery going to the limb has been torn, that I am induced
by experience to adopt a different plan. I will just give you a table of
some of these cases, and mention their results. Sometimes the anterior
tibial artery is torn through. In a case which I perfectly recollect, the
vessel was taken up by a tenaculum and secured, and the patient did
very well. In one case, where the posterior tibial artery was wounded,
it was secured 1)y ligature, and the patient also did well. But in
another case of the same kind the man died, but the hemorrhage was
stopped by pressing a piece of lint into the wound, and the artery was
not tied.



ON COMPOUND FRACTURES.



COO

The introduction of extraneous bodies into the wound to suppress
hemorrhage is wrong in compound fracture, as they produce too much
irritation, and do not effectually answer the proposed object. It is bet-
ter in some cases, in which you have great difficulty to secure the vessel
at the wound, not to be twitching and pulling, and continually irritating
the wound, and frequently to little purpose, but to cut down at once on
the artery, in its course to the part. If, for example, the posterior tibial
artery should be wounded just below the middle of the leg, where it is
deeply covered by muscle, it should be cut down upon higher up, and
secured. Mr. Hey sawed through the fibula to get at the posterior tibial
from the outer part of the leg ; but I should recommend it to be
secured from the inner side of the leg by making an incision between
the gastrocnemii and the tibia, and then cutting through the fascia
covering the deep muscles.

I have only known one instance of the femoral artery being divided
in compound fracture, and I thought it right to amputate immediately ;
the hemorrhage was but slight, but as the artery and vein were both
torn through, I considered there was very little chance of saving the
limb.

In two cases of division of the brachial artery by fracture, amputation
became necessary. In one of these cases I amputated even whilst the
gangrene, which had taken place in the lower part of the arm, was
extending ; but as this arose only from local injury, the patient did
perfectly well.

I shall not have time to-day to go through the difficulties which yet
remain to be described in the treatment of these accidents, and I shall
therefore leave them until we next meet.



LECTURE LXXV.

Gentlemen, I shall now take the opportunity of concluding the
subject of compound fractures ; and shall therefore next speak of these
accidents when extending into the joints.

If a compound fracture should extend into the ankle joint , that, of
itself, would form no reason why amputation should be performed ;
but you should be guided principally by the nature of the injury, by the
age, and also by the constitution of the patient. If the compound frac-
ture extending into this joint be oblique, it will generally do well, pro-
vided care be taken to procure adhesion of the wound, which is best
effected by applying lint dipped in blood to the lacerated integuments,
and allowing it to remain there until it separates spontaneously. The



ON COMPOUND FRACTURES.



601



many-tailed bandage should be applied, and kept wet with a spirituous
lotion, composed of sps. vini, §j. aquae, §v. A splint should be applied
on each side, padded with cushions so as to preserve the great toe in a
line with the patella, as I before mentioned to you, which is a point you
must attend to on these occasions. Place the leg on its side, in the semi-
flexed position, so as to relax the muscles, and render the patient’s
position as easy as possible. The position, however, will require to be
varied, according to the situation of the wound. But if the bone be
comminuted, as well as broken into the joint, and if there be bleeding
from any large vessel, it will be proper to amputate immediately; more
especially if the patient be obliged to work hard for his support, for
after recovery from comminution, the limb will bear but a slight degree
of exertion.

But still, if the constitution be good, and the person be about the
middle age, it is right to take away the small pieces of bone, heal the
wound by adhesion, and produce anchylosis. In one case suppuration
even followed, and the patient did perfectly well.

If a compound fracture extend into the knee joint, and the opening be
large, it will be necessary to amputate, as the constitutional disturbance
will be exceedingly great, and run the risk of destroying the patient.
But if the opening be small, try to procure adhesion, and thus make it
a simple wound. When the condyles of the femur are broken into the
joint, the limb is to be placed on a pillow in the straight position, and
evaporating lotions and leeches are to be used to subdue the inflamma-
tion and swelling which necessarily attend this accident. Supposing
the external wound to have closed, you then apply pieces of pasteboard,
moistened by being soaked in warm water, about sixteen inches long,
and broad enough to reach under the joint, and have them confined by
a roller. When these dry, you will find them exactly adapted to the
shape of the joint, and afterwards retains their form, so as best to con-
fine the bones. I prefer the straight position in these cases, because
the tibia presses the extremity of the broken condyle into a line with
that which is not injured.

Compound fractures of the elbow joint generally happen through the
internal condyles of the os humeri, and the fracture takes an oblique
direction into the joint. In the most severe accidents of this kind, the
constitution is generally able to support them, if they be judiciously
managed ; I could mention to you several cases which would prove the
success of the practice of effecting union by adhesion. A case now
presents itself to my recollection, of which I will give you an outline.

I was called to this hospital, to sec a brewer’s servant who had a
compound fracture of the elbow joint, from the dray passing over his
arm, which had considerably comminuted the bones. I could pass my

3 *



602



ON COMPOUND FRACTURES.

fii.ger leadily into the joint, and feel the brachial artery pulsating on it#
tore part. Considering the violence done to the joint, and the constitu-
tion of the patient ; and men in such employment, you know, are in
the habit of drinking largely of porter and spirits, and therefore render
their constitutions exceedingly irritable : I told him, that f feared there
was scarcely any chance of his recovery unless he consented to have the
limb removed ; this he determined however not to submit to, and I
therefore did all in my power to save both his life and his limb. The
bones were easily replaced, and the parts were brought carefully toge-
ther. The limb was laid upon a splint, a bandage was lightly applied,
and the fore-arm was placed at right angles with the upper arm. The
wound united without any untoward circumstances; and the only
thing that happened, which appeared in the least to retard his reco-
very, was the formation of an abscess in his shoulder, which was
opened, and immediately healed. The joint was not even completely
anchylosed, for he retained sufficient motion to allow him to resume his
former occupation.

If a contrary practice be adopted, if poultices, for example, be applied,
the adhesive process is prevented, and suppuration produced, which puts
life in danger, or renders amputation necessary. I will, whilst I think
of it, give you the result of a case where this practice was followed.

A woman between fifty and sixty years of age was admitted into
Guy’s Hospital, with a wound of the elbow joint, and fracture of both
the condyles of the os humeri. A poultice was directed to be applied,
and fomentations ordered twice in the day. On the day following the
accident, she had a considerable degree of fever. On the third day,
the upper arm was exceedingly swollen, attended with a copious sanious
discharge from the wound. On the fourth day, her strength was greatly
reduced, and the wound had almost ceased to discharge, but the arm.
was very much swollen ; and on the fifth day she died.

In all cases of this accident, the arm should be kept in the bent
position ; for as anchylosis in a greater or less degree will be the
consequence, it is attended with much less inconvenience in this po-
sition than in any other. If the bones be very much comminuted
and the wound large, all the detached portions of bone should be
removed ; but in old people, when much injury is done, there is often
not sufficient strength to support the suppurative process, and amputa-
tion should be recommended. The edges of the wound should be kept
together by placing a piece of lint dipped in blood over them, and a
bandage lightly applied, wetted with spirits of wine and water. Even
if it should suppurate, it will not be necessary to amputate, unless any
thing particular should afterwards happen.

A compound fracture extending into the wrist joint is a very serious



ON COMPOUND FRACTURES.



603



accident when the radius is much comminuted, but it is an injury which
does very well when the radius is broken without being much shattered.

I saw a case of this injury in a patient in the country, where the man
met with the accident by falling upon the back of his hand, and the
ulna protruded an inch and a half through the integuments ; the bone
was immediately Teduced and bandaged lightly ; the wound healed by
the adhesive process, and the man recovered the perfect use of the limb.

I recollect another case of the same kind, which came under the care of
Mr. Chandler, in the other hospital ; I now forget in what manner the
accident happened, but the ulna projected through the integuments at
the back of the carpus, and a compound fracture of the radius, with great
comminution of the bone, was produced. The ulna was first replaced,
but immediately resumed its dislocated position on the back of the
wrist, although it did not again protrude through the skin. The hand
and fore-arm were placed in a poultice, and were ordered to be fomented
twice in the day. A copious suppuration ensued, attended with violent
constitutional irritation ; and Mr. Chandler, in order to save the patient’s
life, after a lapse of several weeks, amputated the limb.

In a similar case, it would be proper, when torn pieces of bone can
be felt at the extremities of the radius, that the wound should be en-
larged for their removal ; and instead of fomentations and poultices
being used, that the wrist should be surrounded by lint dipped in the
blood, and a roller loosely applied. The arm should be supported on a
splint, so as to keep it perfectly free from motion; evaporating lotions
should be applied ; and the limb should not be disturbed unless the
patient has symptoms of a suppurative process, when a small opening
should be made in the bandage, to allow of the escape of pus, but still
the bandages should be suffered to remain. The patient should be bled
from the arm, if the inflammation and constitutional irritation be con-
siderable, and leeches should be occasionally applied under these circum-
stances. The bowels should be kept gently open, but all active purging
avoided. If the suppurative process have extended up the tendons of
the fore-arm, it will be necessary to amputate. The operation should
not be performed where the tendons are loose in the arm, but further up,
in the muscular part of it ; you would otherwise have a sloughy irritable
stump.

Another untoward circumstance is a high degree of inflammation at-
tacking the neighbouring parts. If the patient’s general health be good,
the inflammation will not extend beyond a few inches around the acci-
dent ; but if the patient be irritable, and the injury, for example, be
in the leg, the inflammation will extend along the course of the absorb-
ents to the groin, and if there be effusion at the same time accompanying



604



ON COMPOUND FRACTURES.



this, it must be considered as an indication of great danger. Such ap-
pearances must not be treated very actively by depletion ; apply leeches,
fomentations also, and poultices, to the neighbourhood of the wound.
Lotions also of the liquor ammonia; acetatis, with rectified spirits of
wine, should be applied to the inflammation on the limb, whilst the
poultice is applied to the neighbourhood of the wound. At the same
time opium should be given to allay the constitutional irritability, and
a gentle diaphoresis promoted on the skin, by giving some saline medi-
cines, as the liq. ammon. acet. These symptoms generally make their
appearance in persons who have lived irregularly, either as regards their
diet or their habits. Be very cautious about the administration of purga-
tives, as they disturb the patient very much ; but if absolutely necessary,
give an enema.

Another obstacle met with in the treatment of compound fracture is
an excessive spasmodic action of the muscles. This action is sometimes
so violent as to render all your attempts to overcome it absolutely nu-
gatory. In one case it disturbed the limb so much as to render ampu-
tation necessary, and on dissection it was found that there was a piece
of bone separated from the other parts, and locked between the extremi-
ties of the bone.

It is sometimes necessary to amputate from a want of union between
the fractured ends of the bone ; and on this subject I can furnish you
with the knowledge of a circumstance that may be of the greatest im-
portance in your future practice. You may recollect having seen me
amputate, a short time since, the leg of a young woman in Dorcas
Ward, for a great deformity of the limb; it unfitted her for any of the
active duties of life, and she therefore became desirous of having it re-
moved. By some mismanagement or other the bone was fractured in
the process of parturition, and although she is now about nineteen years
of age, there has not been the least attempt made towards ossific union.
The part where the fracture took place is as flexible as a joint, and I
therefore wish to put you on your guard, so that you may be very
careful to avoid so distressing an accident. I have met with other
cases of a similar description, and therefore I am inclined to think that
it is generally the result of fractures occurring at that period.

The ordinary treatment of these cases is, to bandage the limb firmly,
buckle on a case of firm leather over the limb, and adjust carefully a
splint on each side of it, so that no lateral motion may be allowed. If
it should happen in the leg, let the patient walk as much as she can on
crutches, and thus, by making pressure on the ends of the bone, bring
on a sufficient degree of inflammation to throw out adhesive, and after-
wards ossific matter. I believe non-union is sometimes the result of



ON SUPPURATION IN BONE.



605

continuing cold applications for too long a period to the part, thus
checking that degree of inflammatory action which is absolutely neces-
sary to bring about a restoration of the parts. But if properly managed
it is generally unnecessary to amputate in this state of the parts. Mr.
Aymesbury’s splints will be found very useful in the treatment of such
cases : they have been used at the other hospital frequently, and I be-
lieve have been successful in accomplishing the desired object.

It has been recommended to amputate parts which have been injured
by compound fracture when tetanus makes its appearance. But I ad-
vise you never to do so, as in the cases in which I have seen the practice
tried, I have not observed it successful. What I advise you rather to do
is, to put some of the extract of opium, liquefied by the addition of a little
water, into the wound : I have known this succeed when large doses of
musk and opium had been taken without producing any effect.

When is the most proper lime to Amputate in Compound Fractures ,
supposing the operation to he necessary ?

All the circumstances before mentioned being taken into account, if
it will be necessary to amputate in a few days after the accident, then the
sooner it is done the better.

If you amputate at one hour after the accident, the patient will do
better than if you leave it twelve hours. For this reason, if you ampu-
tate immediately, the constitution has but one shock to sustain, and in
general rallies much better than when the amputation is delayed. But
if you leave it eight or twelve hours, there is a great degree of irri-
tation previously set up. The loss of blood is rather a favourable cir-
cumstance than otherwise, to precede the operation. The persons in
whom these operations succeed the least are such as are loaded with
adipose matter ; if you leave the limb, the constitutional irritation runs
so high that it generally destroys life, and if you amputate, they fre-
quently die in twenty-four hours after the operation, from the constitu-
tion being unable to bear the shock which that operation produces. The
cases of compound fracture admitted into these hospitals generally do
well in the proportion of about three to four, which circumstance, I
think, alone would furnish an incontrovertible proof of the superiority
of the treatment by adhesion to that which was formerly employed.



LECTURE LXXVI.

ON SUPPURATION IN BONE.

.Gentlemen — Abscesses are sometimes found between the periosteum
and surface of the bone, at other times within its cancellated structure,

3 f 2



606



ON SUPPURATION IN BONE.

and, occasionally, but very rarely, between the lamina forming the shell
pf the bone.

W hen an abscess forms between the periosteum and surface of the
bone, it possesses the common characters of the formation of matter :
there is severe pain extending along the surface of the bone ; this pain,
though severe, is of an obtuse kind : it becomes worse at night, and
produces an inequality on the surface of the bone. It is a long time,
however, before the periosteum ulcerates ; the skin presents a circum-
scribed blush ; you may even feel a fluctuation for a long period before
the abscess breaks. The matter is to be evacuated as soon as the red-
ness and fluctuation are distinct ; then place the periosteum as closely
on the bone as you can, leaving a small opening for the discharge of
the matter, and apply at the same time straps of adhesive plaster round
the opening, to keep the periosteum in contact with the bone, and the
probability is that the parts will unite by adhesion. But if the opening
made by nature or by the surgeon be large, the bone is deprived of its
supply of blood, the part exfoliates, and granulations afterwards shoot
out.

The treatment to be further pursued is this : if the bone be much
exposed and die, touch it with an acid that will decompose the phos-
phate of lime, and the cartilaginous part also, and for this purpose the
lotion of muriatic acid , commencing with gtt. ji. to §i. of water, or the
lotion of nitric acid gtt. ji. to §j. will be found the most useful. I
think, however, that the diluted nitric acid is the best ; it induces a
healthy state of the bone, and of the other parts, and it is the appli-
cation which I generally prefer. Sometimes acetic acid is used for this
purpose.

When the granulations arise from either the medullary membrane,
or from the periosteum, or the surface of the bone, cartilage is first
deposited, and afterwards phosphate of lime.

When an abscess forms in the cancellated structure, a peculiar pro-
cess takes place. The result of the pressure of the abscess is to cause
an absorption of the cancellated structure, and in this way the space for
the increase of the abscess continues to be enlarged. At the time
that there is au inflammatory action existing in the medullary mem-
brane, there is a corresponding degree of inflammation going on in the
periosteum, which causes a bony crust to be deposited on the surface,
which materially increases the size and strength of the bone. But upon
that part of the bone least covered by skin and muscles there is an ulce-
rative process going on, which overcomes the deposit from the perios-
teum, and thus the matter is evacuated. In this way it often happens
that there is little of the original bone left, but the weight of the body is



ON SUPPURATION IN BONE.



607

principally supported by the new shell of bone which is formed. But if
the constitution be so enfeebled that it cannot deposit a sufficient quan-
tity of bony matter externally, whilst the process of absorption is going
on within, then the coats of the bone become so thin, that the bone
either breaks, or cannot support the superincumbent pressure.

The best treatment to pursue in this stage of the disease, is to inject
the interior of the bone with the muriatic or nitric acid lotions, the latter
is preferable, and at the same time insist on the observance of rest.
Support the strength of the constitution, and avoid all those causes which
would produce irritation, either generally or locally.

Abscesses in the shell of the bone require to be treated in the same
way, and their process of restoration occurs rather quicker than when
the abscess is seated more internally.

The portions of bone thus deprived of their vitality must separate,
and this exfoliation of bone is either external or internal. When the
periosteum is separated to any extent from the surface of the bone, if it
be immediately replaced, it will again unite, and no exfoliation will
ensue. But if it be allowed to remain detached from the surface of the
bone for twenty-four hours, it will not re-unite, the bone dies, and is
ultimately separated. The dead portion appears at first white, but it
soon becomes black from the hepatized ammonia formed during the
putrefactive process.

The separation of the dead from the living portion of the bone is a
tedious process, and is effected by the action of the absorbents on the
surfaces of the living bone removing that part which is in absolute con-
tact with the dead bone ; a space is thus formed into which granulations
can rise. When these granulations reach the dead bone, they also act
on it, and therefore you find the surface rough and uneven which is in
contact with them, whereas the external surface remains perfectly
smooth.

The principles which are to guide you in the treatment are these : —
quicken the progress of the granulations a little, and act chemically on
the parts by the acids, and that acid which I have before named is the
best. The quickest exfoliation of the tibia which I have ever known
was accomplished in three months. Most generally, however, twelve
months are necessary for this purpose, and it will very often require two
years. But this depends very much on the activity of the constitution.

It is right, if we wish to diminish the size of the exfoliation, to bind
it upon the granulations, which will absorb a part of it ; according to
experiments made by Sir Wm. Blizard on this subject.

Internal exfoliation is also a very singular process. A man who is
losing two-thirds of his tibia is walking about during the period in



008



ON SUPPURATION IN BONE.



which it is separating. This process I have already described to you
when speaking of medullary abscess. In the treatment of this disease,
I should say much might be done to assist the efforts of nature. As soon
as the bones become loosened, which you may easily know by passing a
probe into the wound, what I should advise you to do is this ; take away
a portion of the new bone, so as to admit of your sawing the old bone
into two portions, and then draw them out. After amputation in full
health there is often necrosis taking place on the end of the bone form-
ing the stump. It happens because the bone is exceedingly loaded
with phosphate of lime at the time of the operation ; but if a man be
previously reduced by disease, a thin shell of bone only remains, and the
blood-vessels have a much more free action on the bone.

Exostosis is of two kinds, cartaliginous and fungous. The cartila-
ginous contains only a very small quantity of the phosphate of lime,
and grows originally from the inner surface of the periosteum, and spi-
cula» of bone afterwards shoot into it. The fungous exostosis is rather
a nest of bone enveloping the fungus than constituting the fungus itself.
It grows from the medullary membrane. In the treatment of the fun-
gous exostosis nothing can be done but to palliate ; the growth will
proceed in spite of local and constitutional remedies. Where the exos-
tosis are cartilaginous , growing from the periosteum, they cease to in-
crease beyond a certain -extent, and usually form at the insertion of
tendons into bone, as at the insertion of the triceps abductor magnus.
You should make an incision through the integuments, cut through
the muscle in the direction of its fibres, and having reached the top of
the exostosis, you find the knife easily sinks into it, from it being still
partly cartilaginous. Then slit down the muscle on each side, and apply
the circular saw, invented by Mr. Machim, which is worked by a winch
in the handle. When the exostosis arises from the cancellated struc-
ture of the flat bones, an idea suggested itself to me that it might be
removed in the following way ; by making an incision through the pe-
riosteum covering the tumour, and then separate it further with the
handle of the knife on each side, the exostosis is gradually discharged
by a suppurative process. But do not attempt this where the exostosis
is excessively large ; but it may be done with safety if it be not more
than three or four inches in circumference.

Molliles ossium is an affection of which we know very little. There
appears to be a defect in the assimilating powers of the system, where-
by the proper portion of phosphate of lime is not deposited ; whereas,
in rickets, there is an excess of cartilaginous material. What is often
called mollites ossium, is only rickets, and should be treated accord-
ngly.



ON IMPOTENCE.



609



OF IMPOTENCE.

Although this affection has been arranged in the syllabus with the
sequel® of gonorrhoea, yet I consider it a point of importance for you to
become acquainted with, and shall speak therefore of the causes usually
producing it. There are several causes which produce a destruction of
the virile power. These may sometimes be traced to a peculiar slug-
gishness of constitution, to a general torpor of the procreative system,
on which the usually attractive animal affinities exert no influence. To
such persons a Venus might display her charms, and on such her son
might exhaust his quiver in vain. No genial spring is here, no bloom-
ing summer or fruitful autumn, but all is winter — a dreary, desolate,
and barren winter — in which the springs of life are frozen up, and the
animal propensities destroyed. Some men are so constituted that they
may be said never to possess a venereal stimulus, and some of the other
sex are equally frigid. I knew a person who remained unwarmed by
the flame from the hymeneal altar for seven years, and who was inca-
pable of performing the duties which devolved on him.

Gentlemen, it is likely you may hereafter be consulted on these sub-
jects ; but these are some of the arcana of the profession into which you
will not readily be admitted. No, it is not until you have contended
long with popular prejudices that you will be made acquainted with
such important secrets. When forty years of practice, or perhaps
more, shall have rolled over you, when you shall have the snow on the
tops of the mountains, (here the esteemed professor, with great good
humour, passed his hand through the white locks which grace a well-
formed front), then it is, and not till then, that you will be required to
give your opinion on such weighty matters ! (A laugh). When con-
sulted by persons about to enter the marriage state, you should ask, if
they have any development of sexual power in the morning, and if
they have, depend on it they will not be deficient in energy in the after
part of the day. But, if otherwise, advise them by no means to marry.

Another cause which might produce the calamity we arc now con-
sidering, an excessive irritability of the vesiculce seminales , which pro-
duces a premature expulsion of the seminal fluid, and this is almost as
bad as the former cause. Sometimes it is the result of debauchery, but
most frequently it occurs in irritable and delicate young men ; in such
cases we have to support the constitution by a generous diet and bark,
giving at the same time opium to allay the irritability. In addition to
which let the person stand over a large pan of cold water, and dash it
over the genitals two or three times in the day. Turpentine and rhubarb
are sometimes given, but I am not sure that they do any good.



610



ON BURNS AND SCALDS.



Another cause of impotence is, the frequency of nocturnal emissions,
and this is most commonly the case with young people. It is frequently
the effect of bad habits at school, and it occasions a great degree of
anxiety. We must try to lessen this, by representing to the party, that
it is an occurrence which frequently happens to persons in a state of
health every nine days or a fortnight ; although in the patient’s case it
may happen two or three times during the night. The treatment of this
species will be very much as the preceding.

Sometimes it arises from a wasting of the testicle, or from an abscess
of this gland producing absorption of its structure. The removal of one
testicle does not destroy, neither does it seriously impair the generative
power. The removal of both however, emasculates ; there is an opinion
to the contrary, but it is an erroneous one ; this loss of power does not
happen at once, the secretion of the semen continues for a short time,
and the inclination and the power remain ; but gradually the desire, and
afterwards the power is extinguished.

Impotence sometimes arises from the testicles not having descended.
Mr. Hunter has said, that the testicles, when confined in the abdomen,
do not exercise their functions. This is the case when the testicle is
pressed upon a congenital hernia, when in the inguinal canal. But in
the case of an apprentice of mine, who shot himself because his testicles
had not descended, the secretory ducts were found full of semen. Im-
potence sometimes arises from the state of mind, generally from too
great an impetuosity and eagerness to cohabit. A gentleman, for
example, is recently married, and if not able to perform his wishes — in
two or three days he is very full of anxiety, and the imbecility is con-
sidered by him to be permanent. When consulted by such a person you
must not try to laugh him out of it, but tell him that it is not uncom-
mon, but that it is necessary that he should promise you to abstain from
the attempt for three or four days, or until he has taken all the pills
which you will give him. These may be made of some harmless
material, and that, if he will observe what he has promised, he is sure
to get quite well. He takes two or three pills, but the very promise he
has made, and the impression made on his mind by the promise, induces
him to do the very contrary, and it seldom happens that he can return
with any complaint.

ON BURNS AND SCALDS.

Burns and scalds produce three different effects, vesication, desqua-
mation, and gangrene. If called in when a vesication only is produced,
there is no danger, although the vesicles be numerous and extensive.
The object is to preserve them from bursting, and therefore do not open
them on any account, but allow the serum to accumulate in them until



ON BURNS AND SCALDS.



611



a new cuticle is produced ; the serum escapes, and there is no further
mischief. But if you open them, there is a constitutional effort pro-
duced, which is followed by considerable inflammation, and sometimes
by suppuration, and the sufferings of the patient are very great. All
you have to do is to apply evaporating lotions, as the camphorated
spirits of wine, or spirits of wine and the lotio alba, to prevent the dis-
position which there is in the cuticle to break. A little opium should
also be given to allay the irritability.

But when the second effect I have spoken of is produced, when
the burn is severe enough to separate the cuticle from the surface
of the body, the most violent symptoms arise ; as when a person
falls into boiling water or wort. The exposure of so large a quantity
of cutis produces a great constitutional effort in the re-action that takes
place ; but sometimes a person dies from the shock made on the ner-
vous system, without any re-action having taken place. A child spilt
some tea, which ran over his chest and abdomen, and he died in three
days ; therefore, the desquamation of the cuticle is the worst form of in-
jury, from leaving the cutis unprotected. The spirits of turpentine is
the best application in this form of burn ; as the object is to excite a
speedy re-action ; and if you apply evaporating lotions, re-action can
never take place. Lime-water and oil , and lime-water and milk, have
been commonly used ; but the spirits of turpentine is the best applica-
tion. Where the constitution is irritable, and it gives violent pain,
dilute it with oil, or with the oil and lime-water, and I think it would
then form a very good application. Give opium and wine as long as
the chilly state continues ; but as soon as the heat is developed, and the
pulse has recovered its power, do not continue it any longer, but employ
other means to reduce the inflammation when necessary. Turpentine
does not succeed where the scald is produced by hydrogen, or carbonated
hydrogen gas, so well in London as in the country.

The third state is where the life of the skin is destroyed to a great
extent. There is no immediate danger , for the constitution does not
suffer in the first instance. The danger is to be apprehended when the
sphacelated part begins to separate. The absorbents act briskly, and a
great discharge follows the separation of the part. Fomentations and
poultices are most useful in these cases, as the turpentine cannot act
on the dead surfaces. It is necessary to give wine and opium, as in the
former case, during the chilly state. The treatment is just the same,
indeed, as in a case of common gangrene; and toward the end, when
the process of suppuration is commencing, you may give wine and opium,
or ammonia, to support the constitution.

These cases produce the most remarkable deformities. These are not



6 12



ON BURNS AND SCALDS.



1 1

unfrequently the result of the surgeon’s treatment, as they occur in
great measure after the cicatrization has been completed. They arc
owing to the natural tendency which there is in the cicatrix to contract
The wounds often heal smoothly, but afterwards become puckered.
These contractions are apt especially to occur in the neck, by which
the skin is united to the chest ; and if the arm be the burnt part, the
fore-arm becomes united to the upper-arm. The fingers become united
to each other, and the thumb is sometimes bent very much backwards.
This contraction may be prevented in the arm by passing a splint be-
hind the arm, and keeping the arm extended on it. The same rule I
should be attended to, if there be any danger of the thigh uniting to
the abdomen. You should pass a splint behind the thigh, and keep the
thigh extended on it, and the contraction will be prevented. But as to
the neck, do all you can, by binding the head back, or to either side, >
yet the contractions will take place. When the cuticle is removed, and j
the cutis is in a granulating state, you may produce cuticle over it very
quickly, by using the acetate of zinc wash, made by putting two grains :
of the sulphate of zinc to one ounce of the liquor plumbi subaeelalis
dilutus. This object is sometimes well accomplished by sprinkling the
granulations with the oxide of zinc. But the lotion appears to me to j
be the best. Some lint should be dipped in the lotion, and laid on the
wound ; over this some folded linen should be placed, and over the I
whole a piece of oiled silk, to prevent evaporation.



*** The practical hints and cautions to be found in these Discourses
will be valued so long as Surgery shall be cultivated as a science. They
are founded upon experience , and cannot be controverted.



THE END.



Printed by W. H. Cox, 5, Great Queen Street, Lincoln’s Inn Fields.






I (



















































’































1 
