/o,



CERTAIN SYMPTOMS

OF

/NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.^

By GEORGE M. BEARD, M. D.,

Fellow of the New York Academy of Medicine, Member of the American Neu-
rological Association, etc.

(Read before the New York Academy of Medicine, April 4*, 187S.)



[Sep-ini from Virgmia Medical Mo7t/kfy, Jutie,



Under the term, Nmrasthmm, {usupou, nerve; a, pri.
vative; and adsuo^, strength (lack of nerve strength) I
c esciihed a number of years ago* a functional nervous
chsease of modern and largely, though not entirely, of
neucan origin. It is a malady that has developed mainlv
during the last half century, although scattering cases ap
peared before that time. At present, in the Northern pm-t
ot this country,.this disorder is exceedingly frequent ami is
he cause of much distress; aud yet, likeYuyThei
■mtand mterestiug phenomena of the nervous system itZs
iyen neglected by the profession, and abandoned to

froZlmnlcT^'’"™''*^' '<»'ce-is to be distmguisliod

horn simple annenna-poverfy of blood-with which h is f,

quently combined; and also from hysteria ZZicI, h o
Z ■ Soi'ile of il,e“

«>-■ ""ted athletes have been afllietj in ll!; "Z ’






- iciiu ue

find suliicqueinly ]nibl
Irialy.^ first edition.



4



CERTAIN SYMPTOMS OP



to become an Important and permanent affliction, and to
overshadow other symptoms of the neurasthenic state, it
is called spinal irritation; but strictly, it is a symptom
like cerebral irritation not XR’cperly a disease as sucli, al-
though, as a matter of convenience, there can be no hanu
practically in desexibing it as a disease. In regard to this
symptom of nervous exhaustioix these points are noticeable:
First, its great frequency in the higher classes, especially
among women, I suppose if one should go thi’ough Fifth
Avenue, of Hew York city, and examine the spines of all the
ladies between fifteen and foidy-five years of age, he would
find in quite a percentage of cases, that at times, there would
be tenderness either of the whole lengdli of the spine, or more
likely, at certain points, as the nape of the neck, and between
the shoulder blades and on the middle lumbar vei’tebi'ne.
This condition would be found at times in those who do not
call themselves invalids, and who ai*e not mxder medical
treatment. It would furthermore be found that with some
of these cases there would be tenderness of the scapula or hip
bones, of the breast bone, and, indeed, of the whole surface
of the body. This geixei’xil hyperxesthesia, like the locxil I13’-
perxesthesia of the spine, appears and disappexii*^ untler any
subjective or objective exciting causes, and is attended usually
by a feeling of debility, and oftentimes, though not always,
by backache, headache, insomnia and mental depi’ession.

The transient nature of this symptom of spinal and gonei’xil
iri’itation is shown by the fact thxit it may disappear often on
application of electidcity. Many women alwxxys have spinal
iri’itation during the period of menstruation.

General or Local Itching . — Itching occurring witliout any
visible change in the appearance of the skin, is a common
experience; but is not regxirded as pathological, unless it be
quite severe and persistent. In certain nervous states, it be-
comes an element of positive distress. Itching of the scalp
sometimes immediately folloivs any prolonged and exhaust-
ing intellectual exertion. I know a mxni who wxxs once trou-
bled with a general prickly feeling all over the body, and was
sufficiently annoyed thcrclxy to txike trexitment for it. Cer-
tain regions of the face, arms and legs may be the local seats
of itching, which varies with the general condition of the



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.



5



nervous system. A lady patient of mine, of neurotic inlierit-
ance and temperament, was liable to terrible attacks of itch-
ing on a limited region of the arm; which attacks followed
quickly, almost instantly, after nervous disturbance, and were
not accompanied by the appearance of prurigo.

Abnormalities of the Secretions . — In nervous exhaustion, the
eyes may become moistened more readily than in health, and
under a very slight emotion of pleasure or of pain. The
flood-gates seem, as it were, to stand ajar, and on tritling agi-
tation, the tears flow forth. In grave cerebral disease, this

luptom is common enough, but in functional disease — sim-
j)le nervous exhaustion — it is even more common.

In nervous debility, also, the sebaceous glands may refuse
to do their duty; the hair and beard become dry and stiff, and
much pomade is needed. The hair then falls off or becomes
grey in patches. Dryness of the skin in this state is a sjmip-
toni familiar to all, likewise Is excessive and morbid per-
spiration in the axilla, or in the hands or feet, or other parts
of the body. Clamminess of the hands is, in young men, almost
diagnostic of sexual exhaustion. In this state, also, there
may be a suppression of the spermatic secretion— so that de-
sk e and power are wanting; with the improvement in nervous
vigor, the secretion reappears. Likewise frequent and obsti-
nate constipation of the nervously exhausted is oftentimes a
result of suppressed intestinal secretion.

Tenderness of the Teeth and Attacks of tenderness

of all the teeth, acconqianied by a whitish appearance of the
gums, I have noticed in nervous exhaustion. In these at-
tacks, which may result from oyer-work or excess, all the
teeth may be very tender on pressure, although none of them
arc decayed. Il^ere, then, is another opportunity to studv witli
the naked eye the pathology of spinal irritation. In nmwous
exhaustion, whether complicated with amemia. or not there
may be tenden.ess of any part of the body or of the whole bodv
Jendernessot the bead is cerebral irritation; of tlic snine
Bpma irritation; of tlic tip of tlie spine, coccodynia,' of the
bieast, irritable mamimc; of the ovaries, irritable ovaries; of
the teeth, lierc .lescrilied, dental irritation; of the womli
iitoiine irritation; ot the stomach, nervous dcsiiciiffa- of the
hcrt, table heart; of the eyes’, neurasthotii



6



CERTAIN SYMPTOMS OF



of the whole surface of the body, general liypericstliesia; and
all these various symptoms and expressions, witliout douht,
have a common pathology in nervous exhaustion.

Vague Fains and Flying Neuralgias . — The so-called “ grow-
ing pains” in the young are probably of this class; the force
in the system is insufficient to maintain gro’wth without suf-
fering a degree of impoverishment which expresses itself by
a subdued growl of pain.

Waving, beating, rolling sensations are often felt by the
neurasthenic, even when not exactly hysterical. Shooting
neuralgic pains in the limbs, or nearly all parts of the body,
cause much suffering vdth this class of patients. Sometimes
flying neuralgias are confounded with the neui-algia of incipi-
ent locomotor ataxia, which the^^, in some respects, resemble,
but are not as violent, and do not have so much of the borins:
character.

Flushing and Fidgetiness . — Patients of this class oftentimes
easily flush and easily faint; the inhibitory action of the sym-
pathetic is readily interfered with by any slight emotion.
Fidgetiness and nervousness, inability to keep still — a sensa-
tion that amounts to pain — is sometimes unspeakably dis-
tressing. Although it cannot be deflned, it may be an accom-
paniment of growing pains, and is one of the myriad results
of spinal irritation. Sometimes in writing, the hand and aim
become so nervous and fidgety, that to continue writing
would be the severest torture. Adieu the legs feel this way,
the sufferer must up and walk or run even, though he be de-
bilitated and is made worse by severe exercise. A gentleman
once under my care could not sit still in the chair long
enough to take an application of electricity.

Tremulous and Variable Pulse and Occasional Palpitations . —
In the nervous, the rapidity and quality of the pulse-beats
may vary in many ways during the process of counting.
Frequently the pulse of the nervously e.xhausted is comiu’os-
siblc, and almost always it is more rapid tlian normal, rang-
ing between 75 and 90, frequently going up to 05 and 100 and
more. In exceptional instances, nervous exhaustion has a
very slow ]ndse, in the neighborhood of 40 or less.

Sudden Giving Way of General or Special Functio?is. — The
treacherousness of nervous exhaustion is one of its most eon-



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.






stant cliaractoristics ; its symptoms lurk in ambush and burst
upon us wlien least looked for, when we fancy ourselves ut-
terly and forever delivered from their presence. The neu-
rasthenic patient cannot, therefore, trust himself a half hour
or even a moment in advance. In the morning, he may be,
or feel, able to walk five miles; in the afternoon, from no
traceable cause, it may be a task to cross the street. Even
in the midst of any labor — mental or muscular — his strength
gives out as suddenly as if he were struck by lightning. I
knew a man prostrated for two years with profound neuras-
thenia, who, if he rose and crossed the room, might become
absolutely aphonic. Tavo ladies have been under mj’ care
Avho could walk readily for perhaps a block or more, when
instantly, and Avithout warning, tlieir legs Avould give avra’
beneath them.

Special Idiosyncrasies in Regard to Food, Medicine and Exter-
nal Irritants. — Wlien the nervous system becomes exhausted,
it is apt to develop various idiosyncrasies not before ob-
served; some of them are of high interest. Opium, for
example, is likely to aggraAvate insomnia in many nenrasthenic
patients, instead of putting them asleep, unless, indeed, A'ery
large doses are used. Formerly opium Avas our chief — almost
our only dependence AA^hen Ave AAdshed to put one asleep. Xoav
A ve scarcely think of using it for that purpose in the treat-
ment of the iieiwous, except Avhen there is seA’ere pain to be
relieved. Opium for the iierA'ously exliausted preA’ents sleen
almost as much as coffee. So frequent is this idiosyncrasy,
that Avere it not for the bromides and cannabis indica and
electricity, we Avould be utterly disarmed in the presence of
these cases.

In regard to alcohol, some are so susceptible that a drop
of any form of liquor is instantly and injuriously felt in some
part of the systeni.^ Others, on the otl'ier hand, lose all un-
pleasant susceptilfility to alcohol, and can bear it in incredi-
ble quantities, and may sometimes l>e ]irotited by it. A huh'
Avhom I knoAV,had for years been passing through a series of
symptoms of neiwous depression that our most honored e.\-
perts had failed to relieve. One day an ignorant and, I be-
lieve, mregidar ])ractitioner came into her house, and without
inquiring into her case at all, told her in a rough and author-



8



CERTAIN SYMPTOMS OF



itative- manner to get the best of claret and drink it freely.
The chance shot, sent in the dark and without aim, struck
the very centre of the hull’s eye; the lady bought the best of
claret, drank it with astonishing freedom, and found tliat it did
for her what the best exiiert sldll of our city had failed to do.

Cotfee often acts badly with these cases. The otlier day
a young man, who consulted me for sexual exhaustion with
nervous dyspepsia, told me if he drank a single cup of colfee
in the morning he was unable to attend to his business with
comfort, and conld not calculate or write correctly.

Incidentally, I will remark that the development of idiosyn-
crasies, through nervous sensitiveness, accpiired or inherited, is
the real philosophy of hay fever — a malady which, as I have
shown in my work on that subject, has increased as culture
and civilization have increased, and winch is found usually
in those who have had some other nervous symptoms. As
an effect of this inherited or acquired nervo-sensitiveness,
there appears in one person an idiosyncrasy against bright
sun-light, so that exposure to it brings on the spnptoms of
hay fever; in another, a similar idiosyneras}- as to dust — the
most common of all the excitants of this disease; in an-
other, against fresh hay ; in another, against ipecac or other
drugs; in another, against old hay; in another, against the
odor of roses, or other flowers; in another, against the pol-
len of corn, or of some of the grasses, or of certain weeds or
Roman wormwood, or golden rod ; in another, against some
one of the common fruits — as gr^apes, apples, pears or
peaches, or strawberries, or raspberries, or watermelons ; and
so on infinitely — new developments appearing every year.
On this theory, I based the nerve treatment of hay fever, and
predicted that by means of electricity, strychnine, arsenic and
other sedative and tonic remedies, we should be able to
greatly relieve and break u}-) this distressing disorder, l^ast
year tliis prediction was fulfilled not only in my own practice,
but also in that of other physicians.*

Another idiosyncrasy devcloi)cd by iiervous exhaustion is
sensitiveness to cold or hot neater. A patient of mine could
never bear to even dip his hands in hot water, so disagreea-

*Hay fever regularly decreases as we go South. In the Gulf States it is com-
prratively rare, although it is found here and there in every State. In this re-
spect also, it follows the analogy of other nervous diseases to which it is allied.



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.



9



ble were the sensations it produced ; the same patient was
ahnormall}'^ ticklish and timid.

Dr. Harris, in a recent article on functional nervous trou-
bles,* relates a case of a man of middle life, who, on getting
up in the morning, would feel entirely well; hut as soon as
he had Avashed and Aviped his hands they Avould begin to
burn, tingle and ache A'-ery much, as AA^hen brought near the
fire after exposure to snoAv. After a few seconds, they
would begin to SAvell, and Avould continue to SAvell for five or
ten minutes to such a degree that he could not close or use
them. In the course of an hour or more the SAA'^elliiig w’ould
go doAvn, but Avould recur AAdieneAmr he rubbed his hands.
The phenomena disappeared in a Aveek without treatment.

Sensitiveness to Changes in the Weather is a very often ob-
served symptom of nervous debility ; depression of the nerves
makes the body a good barometer. For tAventy-four hours
' and more before a storm comes on, the aching and Avoru
nei'A^es foretell in every part of the physical organism Avhat is
coming. The sky may be clear, but the spirits are cloudy.
The tenderness of bunions and corns, the aching and stifi-
ness of rheumatic and neuralgic sufferers, the general gloomi-
ness and misery of the exhausted before and during bad
Aveather are not imaginations, but realities as truly as small-
pox or the measles, and quite as much worthy of professional
study and consideration.

I atients of this class are oftentimes made profoundly AAmrse
by the depressing atmosphere of dog days, and generally by
the extreme heat of our summers. The latter half of Au-
gust is especially severe on these cases.

A Feeling of Profound Exhaustion Unaccompanied hy Posi-
tive Ham.— Attacks of a sensation of al)solute exhaustion, as
though the body had not strength to hold together, comes
on very often m the nennnisly exhausted. This feeling of
exliaustion, though not exactly pain in the usual sense of
the word, is yet, in many cases, far Avorse than pain. Idiese
attacks may come on suddenly Avitho.ut Avarning, and may
suddenly disappear. In the m orning, one maAA,e able, or

hat '^l'‘;“’l878n5F Harris assumes

qu£ suppfshir he'



10



CERTAIN SYMPTOMS OF



feel able, to run on a wager; in tlie afternoon of the same
day sitting quietly in a chair seems to he an exliaustiiig ot-
fort to which every nerve and hone and muscle is unequal.
The going-to-die feeling is quite common in these cases, and
at first causes alarm. It may he experienced either in the
day or at uight, on going to sleep, or on awaking from sleep.
This s}unptom, like many of these symptoms, appears at pu-
berty and at the change of life; it indicates that the system
is straining under the burden placed upon it.

Ticklishness. — ISTearl}- all persons are susceptible to the form
of irritation that we call tickling ; but in nervous exhaustion
tins susceptibility may become a severe annoyance. A gen-
tleman once under my treatment for many of the symptoms
described in this paper — spinal irritation being prominent —
was so ticklish on the breast, stomach and abdomen, that it
was very ditficult — indeed, quite impossible — to apply elec--
tricity to those paifs \Ath any satisfaction.

Desire for Stimulants and Narcotics . — When the nervous sys-
tem loses, through any cause, much of its nervous force, so
that it cannot stand upright with ease and comfort, it
leans on the nearest and most convenient artificial support
that is capable of temporarily propping up the enfeebled
frame. Anything that gives ease, sedation, oblivion, such as
chloral, chloroform, opium or alcohol, may be resorted to at
first as an incident, and finally as a habit. Such is the ])hi-
losophy of many cases of opium or alcohol inebriety.
bTot only for the relief of pain, but for the relief of ex-
haustion, deeper and more distressing than ]>ain, do both
men and women resort to the drug shop. I count this as one
of the great causes of the recent increase of opium and al-
cohol inebriety among Avomen. Frequently an inherited ten-
dency to inebriety is utterly latent, and docs not break out un-
til afiiiction,or some form of AAmrryor distress, robs the brain
of its nerve force. Very many cases illustrative of this have
been published I)}’ my friend. Dr. T. D. Crothers, uoav snpei-
intendent of the Walnut Hill Asylum for Inebriates, Hart-
ford, Conn.

Insomnia.- — The Avakcfulncss of the nervous is a synqitom
at once common and distressing, and is sometimes rebellions
to all our bromides, and even to chloral. [Sometimes it is the



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.



11



very first symptom of nervous disturbance, expressive of a
mild phase of difficulty, and disappearing as the disease gets
worse. In other cases, it is constant and obstinate from first
to last. This S3miptom may yield to electricity v'hen other
medication has no power.

Nervous Dyspei^sia {Dyspepsie Asthenique ). — It is one of the
peculiarities of nervous dyspepsia that it abhors a vacuum; is
always much' worse when the' stomach is nearly or quite
empty. Patients so afflicted need to take light meals, and to
bake them frequently — perhaps very many times daily.

In cases — not a few — nervous dyspepsia is the first noticea-
ble s^miptom of nervous exhaustion — the earliest sign that the
bod}" is giving way ; and for years, the stomach ma}’ be func-
tiouall}'^ disordered before the brain, or spinal cord, or other
parts or organs show signs of ^fielding ; hence the quite com-
mon belief that dyspepsia leads to softening of the brain. The
true philosophy is that nervous dyspepsia is a sj'iuptom of the
same general pathological condition as all the orders of symp-
toms here noted, and it maj’ follow as well as lead this multitu-
dinous army. A literary gentleman whom I once met gave a
history of nervous exhaustion from over-confinement, that after
some years broke out through the pneumogastric nerve, caus-
ing profound and obstinate d^-spepsia that for a long time
made him a complete invalid ; the s^unptoms were almost as
bad as those of cancer of the stomach, and yet the disturb-
ance was entirely functional, and the patient improved.
Flatulence with annoying rumbling in the .bowels, these pa-
tients complain of very frequently; also nausea and diar-
rheoa.

Partial F ailure of Memory . — Memory is a measure of mind.
^Vlien rightly studied, it is perhaps tiie most delicate of all
neurometers or indicators of the nervous force in health and in
disease. AFith the growth of the brain in childhood, mem-
oi-y grows, and it declines with the slow deca^^ of normal old
age. l^artial failure or treacherousness of memory is not
not onl}^ a sign, but in some cases, one of the very first signs
ot exhaustion of the nervous system. Pusine.ss men find
that they cannot depend on their memories as formerly ; they
forget details of engagements — sometimes those of ' impor-
tance and thus are various!}' inconvenienced.



12



CERTAIN SYMPTOMS OF



Sexual Exhaustion, or that foi’m of nervous exhaustion
that is noticed in young men who over-excite or over-use the
genital function, in the natural or unnatural way, is usually,
if not always, accompanied by failure of memory; hut other
forms of nervous exhaustion .in both sexes, offer the same
symptom.

Deficient Mental Control. — Inability to concentrate the in-
tellect on any task, as in writing or tliinking, is a notable
symptom. The mind wanders away in every direction, and
when brought back by an effort of the will, is liable to be soon
again lost in reverie.

In some cases, the exercise of concentration, or even slight
attention, is exceedingly irksome and painful, causing dis-
tress sometimes in the head,, sometimes in the back or ex-
tremities, or other parts of the body.

Seminal Emissions — Partial or Complete Impotence. — Occa-
sional seminal emissions in the healthy and unmarried are phy-
siological — that is, they are not symptoms of disease, but nor-
mal and necessary results of abstaining from sexual intercourse.
Such involuntary discharges, when excessively frequent, are
both results and causes of disease, indicating an abnormal,
usually an exhausted state of the nervous system, and in turn
re-acting on the nervous system, increasing the very exhaus-
tion that causes it. Such, in general, is the philosophy of all,
or nearly all, cases of frequent involuntary seminal emissions.

An attack of acute disease of any kind may leave the sys-
tem, during convalescence, in a state where seminal dis-
charges may take place with far greater than the normal fre-
quency ; on return to health, this symptom, with all other
sym[)toms of debility, disappears.

Chronic neurasthenia is often accompanied, as one of its
symptoms, by seminal emissions, even in those who are mar-
ried ; indeed, some of the most persistent cases I have seen
have heen in married men.

Impotence — partial or absolute— when it appears as an ef-
fect of ucuriistheuia, as it frecpicntly does, usually recovers
with the improvement in the nerves, sometimes without spe-
cial treatment.

Chanc/cs in the Expression of the Eyes and Countenance.

In sexual exhaustion, downcastness of the features, aversion



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.



13



of the eyes, and general sheepiness of manner, vnth dark cir-
cles beneath the e^^es, are symptoms that have long been ob-
scured, but these signs, taken individually, are not pathog-
nomonic of any special form of nervous exhaustion, since
they appear in nervous and digestive debility, ho'ivever
caused. It is, however, undeniable that these symptoms, in
their entirety, do occur very frequently in the debility asso-
ciated with sexual disorder, and may, perhaps, be set down
as distinctive of that form of nerve disorder.



The mere expression of the eye is modified by disease in a
way that it is hard to analyze or describe. How a nighfis de-
bauch allects the expression is well known. In chronic ner-
vous exhaustion from any cause or combination of causes,
this expression of debility may become chronic — a perma-
nent state that is revealed at once on meeting and addressince
the sufferer. ^

^ A lady whom I once treated for numerous nerve difficul-
ties, and who entirely recovered, told me that as she got bet-
ter the whites of her eyes were of a clearer blue, and conse-
quently, to her delight, more attractive. This fact was ob-
served by several of her friends as well as myself.

_ Mmtal Depression with aeneral Timidity.— In disease, as
in health, fear is one of the sjmiptoms of weakness— an emo-
tion with winch the instinct of self-preservation emnrons
eveiy form of incapacity. In our half-awakened moments at
midnight, a slight noise causes the heart to beat rapidly for
we are conscious of not having full possession of our powers
to meet any attack or danger. The nervously-exhausted man
18 always in this state, physically insolvent, and unequal to
eftoi ts that require much vital expenditure. In that form of
nervous exhaustion known as sexual exhaustion, senseless
timidity 18 cme of the diagnostic features; fear-of sociefv, fear
of the indefinite future, unwillingness to enter upon li'iiv cn-
ei prise, inabi ity to look one squarely in the face,downhcart-
edness and nulodmtc distrast. Patients of tliis kind wiliVaik
up and down before apbysicia.i's office many times l.cfore ven

unngtoenter. This ti.nidityi.econies ase, ■ions .natter in In, sii

.css, making sneecss vciy .litlicnlt. One of n.y patients t.-ou
blc.lw.thoerebn,l exi.anstion, of very large „4,Itl.
business experience, tells me that, desiring once to bonw, in



14



CERTAIN SYMPTOMS OF



perfect security, some money for a certain Inisiness purpose,
lie walked several times up and down the front of the office
of the capitalist whose aid he sought, before he could sum-
mon the strength to go in.

The mental depression of the nervously exhausted is
largely independent of external conditions, although it ma}’
be aggravated by them — especially by bad weather ; a cer-
tain amount of blood and nerve force is needed for happiness.

A very eminent theologian and preacher, who consulted
me three or four years ago, told me that when he had charge
of a parish, the responsibility of sitting in his pulpit and lis-
tening to a travelling agent, exhausted him more than preach-
ing himself, for the reason that he continually feared that the
stranger would say or do some indiscreet thing.

Responsibility of any kind, without any labor, even when
unconscious, may powerfully affect the system, and in various
ways. Thus a young man whom I knew, who was badly
troubled with seminal losses, causing great nervous exhaus
tion, resolved to try the woman cure, and made regular ap-
pointments with a lady friend. It was a new experience for
him, and he professed to have no pleasure in the sexual act,
and felt somewhat timid and dastrustful about the matter.
The consecpience was that the responsibility of meeting liis
appointment would always cause him to have free pas-
sages from the bovnls, although generally he was very con-
stipated.

Morbid Fear of Special Kinds {Agoraphobia and Astraphohia).
Fear of leaving home, of going out of the house, of going
anywhere alone, of crossing a ferry, of crossing an open
scpiare, of going through a narrow alley, of going away from
the neighborhood of shops or open places of refuge, are some
of the })hases that this symptom develops. This symptom is
not very common, but when r\ docs occur, it is very annoy-
ing and sometimes quite obstinate. It is a ludicrous and ab-
surd symj)tom, but it may occur in persons of intelligence and
ability and good sense. It is analogous in some respects to
the utter helplessness that some experience when standing on
an elevation; the will is put to rout completely, and cannot
rally at the call of reason.



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.



15



I was consulted not long ago by a physician, who was so
harassed hy this symptom of nervous exhaustion tliat he was
uiiahle to attend to his practice. His physical strength was
sufficient, hut on account of the agoraphobia, he could not
go any distance from his office -svith any comfort. He would
be Avorking in his garden, hut when requested to go a mile,
or even less, to see a patient, he could not respond. On
walking out Avith him one morning, I ohseiwed that he turned
the corners often so as to keep about such a distance from
the hotel, AAdiere he was stopping. Under electrical and
other treatment, the physician is improAung, and is attending
to his profession.

Dr. C. L. Mitchell tells me of a gentleman who AAms so



badly agoraphobic that he Avas unable to leaAm his house,
Avithout company, and accordingly he paid a man $ 20,000 to
be his constant companion. There haA^e been men aaOio, by
this symptom, haA'e been kept as close prisoners as though
AAnthin the walls of a penitentiary. In some instances, though
not in all, this strange symptom seems to be traceable di-
rectly to sexual excess of some Idnd.

Sometimes A^ery bad cases of this malady entirely recoAnr.
I have knoAA'ii three persons Avho AA^ere unable to cross the
Brooklyn Ferry, and all got AA^ell in a feAv weeks or months.

My friend. Dr. D. E. Smith, of BrouxAulle, H. Y., tells
me of a lady Avho is unable to cross Harlem river on the
cars, and consequently cannot Ausit Hcav Yqrk city.

^ I have noAv under my care a lady in AAffiom the agorapho-
bia takes the form of inability to go to church. It Avas in
church that she Avas first taken AAotli a peculiar and hard-to-
be-described lightness of the head; and she noAv feels that
she could do^ almost anything else rather than attend
church: Ability to do that she Avonld regard as the best and
strongest sign of recoATry. A young business man, aa’Iio
A vas first attacked Avith liad symptoms in his factory, dreaded

to enter the building, until, under electrical treatment, he
recoA'ered.

Ihe term astrapholna, or fear of lightning, I have ajiplied
to that foi-m of uerAV)usiiess that is paiufuliy afiected before
and during thunder storms. Headaches, neuralgias ‘ of va-
)us ciuds, dcpitssioii, spasms, are some ot the symptoms



16



CERTAIN SYMPTOMS OF



of tliis state, wliicli, in some instances, is liereditarv, and rnns
in families.*

Fear of Society is a phase of morbid fear that is common
enough in all forms of nervous exhaustion, hut is, perhaps,
most often noticed in sexual complications. AVitli fear,
blushing of a senseless but overpowering character is often
combined ; the victims are ashamed to enter the presence of
ladies — to enter the presence of any one ; they cannot look
any one in the face, but in conversation keep their eyes
turned down or aside.

Sick Headache and Various Forms of Head Pain. — Sick
headache is both a symptom and a safety-valve. If one must
be nervous, an occasional attack of sick headache, if it be not
too severe, is an excellent way for this nervousness to manifest
itself, and, no doubt, saves other and worse affections. When
sick headaches suddenly and permanently leave us, there may
be reason to beware, though not probably in all cases. Some
years ago, I had under my care, for a short time, a case of shak-
ing palsy that had followed a sudden and apparently causeless
cessation of sick headache. When sick headache leaves us,
as a result of improvement of the nervous system through
treatment or hygiene, it is so far forth a good sign.

Like most of the symptoms of nervous exhaustion I am here
describing, sick headache is experienced mostly between the
ages of fifty and fifteefi. Karely, or never, do young children
have it, and it usually stops before old age. It is a symptom
that belongs to the perturbable and active years, and may
quickly show itself when, from any cause, the nervous sys-
tem is depleted of its force.

Fain and Heaviness in the back of the head and over the
vertex and through the whole head, very commonly attend
the neurasthenic state — especially when the Itraiii is con-
gested ; but many also appear where there is no evidence of
au excess of blood on the brain. Lightness of the head is
also a common complaint; also a .symptom usually defined
as “ I oaimot tell how I feel.”

Here 1 may remark that very much has been .said,* is now
said, and for a long time i)robably will continue to be said

*i)card & Rockwell’s Medical and Surgical Elcctrictfy, 2tl ed., p. 456.



NERA’OUS EXHAUSTION.



17



circulatory disturbances as the patbology'of all these and kin-
dred symptoms ; and when such a symptom is declared to de-
pend on cerebral or spinal aniemia or hypercemia, it is sup-
i:iosed that we have solved all the problems that relate to it.
For a number of years, I have been contending that circula-
tion is a result of innervation. The brain and spinal cord, im-
poverished of nerve force, are unable to maintain the balance
of the ebb and flow of the blood of the arteries and veins; con-
secpiently ansemias and congestions arise that may be tran-
sient or more or less permanent. But the disease is not the
anaemia nor the hypertemia (although both ancemia and hy-
penemia, when they occur, may and do induce certain symp-
toms peculiar to themselves) ; but it is the neurasthenia —
the nervous exhaustion, the decline in the quantity or quality
of nerve force — ^that presides over the circulation, although
it cannot, like the blood, be weighed, measured, analyzed or
studied under the microscope. This view, though scarcely
listened to, and not at all understood, when tirst pressed, is
no’^v slowly gaining its way among the neurologists, both of
Europe and America.

There may be anaemia of the nerve-centres without ex-
haustion, as after haemorrhages; and there may be sudden
congestion of the spinal cord, from taking cold, or of the
brain from various causes — but these are not the'conditions
of which I am here speaking. They occur in those who are
not nervously exhausted; indeed, congestions arc more likelv
to occur in the plethoric and strong; they come rather under
the head of acute and traumatic disorders.



Disturbances of the Nerves and Organs of Sjieoial Sense.—

Kervous exhaustion often causes dilatation of the pupils

sometimes dilatation of one p\ipil and contraction of the

other. These conditions are temporary and changino- not

permanent — as in certain organic diseases.

Another malady of the eye is what I may call neurasthenic
asthenopia, or the irritable eye, from nervous exhaustion
not depending on any muscular or accommodative trouble'
but symptomatic purely, revealing nothing to the ophthalmo-
srope or other tests of modern oplithalmology, l)ut none the
less painful, distressing and Honielinics exceedinglv obstinate



18



CEETAIN SYMPTOMS OF



This disease of thohyo, symptomatic of nervous exhaustion,
I observed and called attention to a number of years ago, but
could tind no formal recognition of it in the standard text-
books of ophthalmology. But, very recently. Dr. Mathewson,
in conversation on the siibject, tells me that this tliird form
of asthenopia is now, under various names, coming into re-
cognition in the journals and societies devoted to diseases of
the eye.

An attack of this neurasthenic asthenopia — which is oft-
times so severe that reading or writing, or sewing, are ac-
complished only with great pain, and the eyes are painful and
tender on pressure even when not used — an attack of this
kind may last half an hour, or three hours, or three months ;
and, like analogous states in other parts of the body, with
which it is often accompanied, may come and go very sud-
denly. In loolving at the eye when in one of these attacks,
we observe often a passively-congested state of the conjunc-
tiva. This congestion is a result — not the cause — the effect
of the nervous irritation, and comes and goes under exciting
causes. Such, without question, is the pathology of cerebral
irritation, of spinal irritation, of irritation of tlie mamma?,
the ovaries and testes, and of sick headache and many other
forms of neuralgia. The notion which has been advocated —
that this neurasthenic asthenopia, or irritable eye, is |)eculiar
to women, and always reflected from the nterus, and tlicre-
fore to T)e called nterine asthenopia, is but an adumbra-
tion of the truth; for the malady, though most common
in women, like all this family of symptoms, is found in both
sexes; the very worst cases I have ever seen have been in
males. Bcvcrul of my cases have been examined by our best
experts in ophthalmology. This form of eye weakness is



qnitc susceptible to the influence of psychical contagion. A
number of years ago it spread through many of the colleges
and seminaries of the country — in some instances compel-
ling young men to abandon theii’ plans of liberal education.

MuHciv VoUtantes, or floating specks before the eyes, often an-
noy even the slightly nervously exhausted; in these eases, the
opiithalmoscope is only of negative assistance. Under excit-
ing causes^ the sjiecks smldenly a|ipear and disajipear. Lhe
liabilitv to them mav be a habit of one slife.



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION .



19



ISfoises in the Ears in the shape of sudden explosions or pulsar
tions, to siiy nothing of other varieties of tinnitus anriiun, are
quite common in cerebral exhaustion, especially when attended
vdth congestion. These explosions may come on without
any warning, while one is sitting quite still, and there is no
apparent exciting cause. These symptoms may occur even
when there is no perceptible disease of the auditory apparatus,
and may disappear as suddenly as it appears. A feeling ot
fulness and oppression in the head sometimes attend these
symptoms. Subjective odors of various kinds — as of ozone or
phosphorous; also abnormal subjective tastes — hitter or sour;
likcAvise fleeting symptoms of cerebral exhaustion are ob-
served.

Localized Peripheral Numbness and Hypercesthesia . — In any
portion of the peripheiy — the face, the arms, the ends of the
fingers, the thighs, the legs and the toes — there may he, in
nervously exhausted patients, persistent numbness of a defi-
nitely localized character, or excessive sensibility, similarly
localized. In some cases, this local peripheral hyperpesthesia
amounts to a very distressing disease. I Avas once consulted
by a physician Avho had hypenesthesia of the left hand, caused
apparently by local injury acting on a nervous diathesis. The
condition was very obstinate, and caused much distress. I
once had under my care a laAAyer Avho had a burning feeling
in the thumb and fingers of the right hand, Avith pain some-
times running up the arm. At first I suspected that the
symptoms were premonitory of Avriter’s cramp. The patient
Avent to Europe and took various treatments under the direct
tion of Charcot and other neurologists Avithout important
benefit; but is noAV able, to pursue the routine of his profes-
sion. I have noAv under my care a gentleman Avho has had, for
a long time, a sensation of numbness and burning at the ends
of his thumbs, at the bottom of the heels, and around the
legs and ankles. These synqitoms are accompanied by the
usual symptoms of cerebral exhaustion and congestion — pain
in the head, a feeling of fulness and pressure, and mental de-
])ression. Sometimes there are fiyiug, stinging, pricking
sensations in the feet and legs, that caused one European
]'liysician to make the diagnosis of “ Hying gout.” With hy-
giene and electrical treatment, this patient has improved in



20



CERTAIN SYMPTOMS OF



ii maimer most encouraging; and what is of eliief interest Just
here, the improvement in the periplieral symptoms has ex-
' actly kept pace with the improvement in tlie brain symptoms,
shoAving their common nature.

Symptoms of this kind excite fear and dread — oftentimes
as indicating graA^e and structural brain disease, or as pre-
monitory of apoplexy; hut in the majority of cases, they are
the results and signs of functional — not structural trouble,
and occur in people A\dio Ih’-e to old age.

I haA^e seen a number of cases Avhere there Avas numbness
on a limited area of the thigh, and all have recovered or per-
manently improAmd Avithout a very had history.

Among other special symptoms coming under this head, I
may mention a crawling or creeping as of insects just beneath
the skin — a sensation as though a pin or many pins AA^ere just
touched to the skin; a tendency for the legs and arms to “go
to sleep,” under far slighter pressure than in the normal .state
of health, is observed in cases of this class. Sitting a A’ery
short time in a hard chair, riding in an omnibus, or car or
carriage may cause the foot to get aslee}), AA'hen, in entire
health, no such etfect would haA^e been produced by tlie same
cause.

I have noAV under my treatment a man Avho often Avakes
up at night Avith a strong hut transient sensation of numb-
ness in the little linger and inner side of the third linger,
conlined to the track of the ulnar iicrA'e. In other cases,
other nerves of the arm may be involved, and all the lingers
may be numb. Numbness of this kind usually goes aAA'ay
after a little shakino' and rubbing. It is more likelv to come
on at night from lying on the arm; but in the daAdime, also,
it may occur AAdien the arm rests for a Icav moments OA'er the
back of a chair. When one is specially exhausted or Avor-
ried from any cause, this transient and local numbne.ss is
•more likely to shoAv itself. The pathology of this state is
])robably, if not certainly, an obstruction in the passage ot
the nerA'e force through mechanical pressure. In the highest
health, .sufficient pressure AA’ill produce this condition, and it
the pressure be kept up, permanent paralysis may occur; but
in nervous exhaustion, AA’hen the nerve force moves sloAvly
and AA'ith A’ery little vis a much slighter pressure suffices



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.



21



to obstTuct its passage — -just as water, flowing slowly tlirough
a rubber tube, can be checked by a gentle touch of the An-
ger, but if flowing rapidly and with great force, needs a stop-
cock.

General and Local Chills and Flashes a f Heat . — 'Disturhance
of circulation both follows and accompanies disturbance of
innervation. Creeping chills up and down the spine are
commonplace; but there are symptoms allied to this not so
familiar. Thus Dr. J. IT. Sterling had under his treatment,
at one time, a lady whose knees were literally as cold as ice —
that is, they felt to her as cold as though they were packed
in ice. I knew of a case wliere there were limited and small
areas of heat and cold sensations on the arms. I have also
known cases where the ankles were cold, even when other
parts of the body were comfortable. After fatigue or worry,
tlie penis and scrotum, as well as the ears, or one ear, and
one foot or both feet, and one hand or both hands, may be
cold to the touch — even in warm weather, and in a hot room,
or when thickly wrapped up, Patients in this state are, in-
deed, like Harry Gill, very, very cold, no matter what they
put on; the skin may be almost blistered, as they stand near
the Are, and yet chills are running all over them.

Long writing, which may produce symptoms of writer’s
cramp in others, may, in the nervously exhausted person,
cause coldness of the_ fingers, hand or arm, especially when
the arm is elevated. Yet more minutely may this symptom
of coldness be localized; spots as small as the point of a pin
apparently — especially on the face — may be pinchingly or
stingingly cold — this sensation quickly appearing and cpiickly
disappearing.

Loeal Spasms of Muscles . — 'What are called “fibrillary con-
tractions,” and which sometimes occur in progressive mus-
cular atrophy, are also noticed in the various shades of ner-
vous e.xhanstion. An individual muscle or part of a muscle
may twitch occasionally or frequently, so as to cause consid-
erable annoyance, and in some eases, unnecessary anxiety.
As these vibrations occur in the orbicularis, and other mus-
cles of the face, these spasms are very lamiliar; they come
and leave without warning, and suddeidy. I was once con-
versing on nervous diseases with a well known physician,



00



CERTAIN SYMPTOMS OP



all at once, tlie orbicularis of one of liis eyes began to
twdtcli vigorously; be said it was the lirst time in bis life that
be bad experienced anything of the kind; be regarded the
use of tobacco as tbe probable cause.

The stomach, in nervous dyspepsia, may l)e tbe seat of sim-
ilar spasms, which may follow any excitement or emotion, as
of fear or responsibilit}^ A sensation like that of a reverse
aura seems to go downward to the pit of tbe stomaeb from
tbe nerve centres, and excites spasm, apparently, of tbe mus-
cles of tbe stomach itself.

I close with these suggestions:

Tbe above detailed symptoms are not imaginary,
but real ; not trifling, but serious ; although not usually dan-
gerous. In strictness, nothing in disease can be imaginary.
If I bring on pain by worrying, by dwelling upon myself,
that paiii is as real as though it were brought on In’ an ob-
jective influence. Modern science is built up in a degree by
observations of phenomena that all the ancient and medieval
world regarded as beneath observation. Is not the obsenung
and right interpreting of subtle, obscure, elusive and out-of-
the-way phenomena of disease the best test of scientific sldll ?

Secondly . — These symptoms of nervous exhaustion are, in
a measure, interchangeable — antagonistic to each other — and
nervous exhaustion is itself antagonistic to manv other dis-
eases — especially of the acute and inflammatory sort. Dis-
eases prevent disease ; diseases cure disease ; diseases are an-
tidotes to disease. Suflercrs from chronic neurasthenia are
safer in the midst of epidemics than others are ; they are not
subject, as are the robust and tull-blooded, to violent and ta-
tal fevers; and when attacked, they are more likely to sur-
vive. To this numerous class of suflercrs, it is, then, a conso-
lation that their disease is itself medicine and hygiene.
Opium-eaters, I am told, arc comparatively exempt from ma-
laria, and in the East pass unharmed through the epidemics
of cholera.

Likewise alcohol inebriates do not usually sufler from ordi-
nary nervous exhaustion. E.vccsses of any kind tliat injure
us in one way may .save us from l>eing injured in other ways.
Alcohol seems to act as as internal counter-irritation.

The interchangeahlcncss of these symi>toms is also note-



NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.



23



wortliv. In nervous exluiustion, nothing is constant except
inconstanc^A The symptoms chase eacli other like the
shadows of summer clouds across the landscape. The mo-
ment one leaves, another and several stand ready to take
their place. In a single day, one may go through the whole
gamut of all these notes of disease.

Thirdly . — The ])eriodical and rhythmical character of some
of these symptoms is of much interest.

While this paper is being rewsed, I have been consulted
by a clergyman of middle life, who, vdth many other symp-
toms of neurasthenia, is troubled with attacks of special and pe-
culiar depression, lasting for about a day, more or less. These
attacks are ushered in usually by a feeling of mental exalta-
tion ; then come diplopia, with other abnormal phenomena
of vision, and so on through quite a regular series of nervous
symptoms. Prostration from heat was the original cause of
the attacks, which are noAV brought on by any mental or phy-
sical exhausting or disturbing influence. The patient finds
that a drop or two of belladonna taken during the stage of
exaltation will always break up the attack, and now he
always Carries a bottle of that remedy in his pocket. I once
had under treatment a young man who had attacks of ner-
vous depression every day about noon ; they lasted hut for a
short time, but were as periodic as chills and fever — and like
cbills, and like the preceding case, passed through definite
stages.

Fourthly . — hlervous exhaustion is compatible with the ap-
pearance of perfect health.

For this reason, as well as on account of the slippery, fleet-
ing and vague return of their symptoms, patients of this
class get l)ut trifling .sympathy. Sometimes they are fixt and
hearty, and have a ruddy, vigorous, strength-suggestive bear-
ing; sometimes also they grow fatter as they grow woi'se.
FToticeably the disappearance of symptoms in the stomach,
and the appearance in their stead of symptoms in the brain
ami spinal cord, is Ibllowed by increase in weight that de-
ceives the friend, the physician, and even the patient himself.

1 bus it happens that patients get the least sympathy when
they most need it.

I our years since, a prominent politician consulted me for



I



24



CERTAIN SYMPTOMS OF NERVOUS EXHAUSTION



a medley of nervous symploms induced Ly sunstroke — a not
uncommon cause of neurastlienia. lie was an enormous,
herculean man, hut gave a history that would well luive be-
htted the most delicate and hysterical woman.

Fifthly . — iSTervous exhaustion is a modern disease, aud pre-
eminently an American disease-, and in this coimtiy is cliieily
found in the ]!^orth and East. This disease must, therefore,
he studied here ; we cannot, as in so many other diseases,
look to Germany for light and information — for in Germany
this condition is comparatively unknown, and in France and
England is far more rare than with us. It is a disease al-
most exclusively of the Avell-to-do classes, and can, therefore,
he satisfactorily studied only in private practice. ^ledioal
treatises founded entirely on hospital and dispensary expe-
rience are of little service to those who desire guidance in the
analysis of this or of kindred disorders.

Sixthly . — The treatment of nervous exhaustion should he
in general of. a sedative and tonic character; should not he
exclusively applied to any one of these special sym})toms,
hut to the whole condition — to the main trunk and not to
the . separate branches. Electricity in central and general
applications with both currents, varied aud abundant food,
passive exercise, as massage, in some eases, absolute rest
in bed, in others, mild, active exercise, and the judicious use
of such remedies as relate to the nerve-centres, counter-
irritation by very small blisters, or the actual cautery, dry
cold to the urethra through the cooling catheter, lor the special
form known as sexual exhaustion; fats, tish and phosphates
of various kinds — and internally, cannabis indlca in small
doses, combined with the bromides, strychnine, of course,
with calabar beau, the preparations of zinc aud arsenic, gel-
Bcminum aud bromohydric acid, catfeiu, malt and oil — under
this system of treatment, ada[)tcd witli care and study for iu-
dividualid iosyucrasies, and condhned witli right hygiene, the
majority of cases of neurastlienia can be jieruumently relieved,
if not substantially cured. 
