Google



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project

to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at |http: //books .google .com/I



I



'/■



/^jy.




T



THE

SILENT FEIEND;

TBEATXNO ON THB

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF THE
ORGANS OF GENERATION,

AND THEIR DISEASES,

WITH OBSEBVATIONS ON ONAiHSM AND ITS BANEFDIi EE8ULTS.

INCLUDINO

MENTAL AND SEXUAL INCAPACITY AND IMPOTENCE,

AND ON THB

YENEREAL AND SYPHILITIC MALADIES,

Wltlx plain and deax Directione for the Sexnoval of
8«eondai7 Symptoms, Oonorrhea or Clap, Gleet, Strictore, Whites, and all Diseases

Of the Urinary Organs,

CONCLUDING WITH GENEBAL OBSEBVATIOKS ON

MARRIAGE AND ITS IMPEDIMENTS,

FROM THB EVIL CONSEQUENCES ARISING PROM EARLY ABUS

SYPHILITIC INFECTION,

WITH THE MEANS FOR THEIR REMOVAL



ILLUSTRATED BY COLOURED ENGRAVINGS.




BY R. AND L. PERRY & CO.



dtonmltinq Surgeons,

19. BEBKEBS-STEEET, OXFOED-STEEET,

LONDON.



LONDON :

PUBLISHED BY THE AUTHORS,
Sold bt Stbangr, 21, Patbbnostee-row: Hannay & Co., 63, Oxforb-

tTBBBT: PUBKISS, COMPTON-STBEET, SOHO: AND BT ALL
BOOBBELLBBS IN THB UNITED KINGDOM.

iBNTBBBD At BTATIONFBB* HALL.]




FIUINTIM'IErE
^riymt riew nr'fAr nmh-nhi tit'
lit rt A^ff/My .v/ii/r




IJTFKIKNn;



IffrtiulWtfl.



■m vti«



nriSD PH\sioi.iuj\ oi

S^S OF GKNKUAIU»N



I til



Dit



ncuMva

^ M ymmcAFACiTVAWfiiMt'oiiM* »

ttliroSTPIIIMTI': MAI AMI



OrftiTfffc«r7'. ''^ '



r/ • ■



DKIjtSD IT*



r><»



. f



Lj^T iiy}




-■ ..'-^'




OF



ass




Pa«b,
8
9
10
18
IS
15
18
19
20
21
14,23
23
2S
2t
28
29
39
SI
32
32
33
3»
39
39
49
41
41
42



CONTENTS,



ANATOMY OF THE ORGANS OF
GENERATION.



OF THE SUBSIDIARY OBOAN8.

Pa«b«
Of thekidxieTB .... .8

Of the nzetera and bladder . . , , . 9

The secretion of vuine . . , .10

Theyenalcspsvlesandthesorotttm ... .18

Of the testicles ...... 18

nie spermatic vessels .15

Tile seminifiBrons tubes . .18

The epididymis ...... 19

The Taseulum abeirans, and the vas deferens . . .20

The testicles in the foBtns . . . . .81

The non-descent of the testicles, and the state of those otjgans • 14, 23
Opinions of ytt. Hnnter, Mr. Owen, and Mr. Pott . 83

Arrest o^ development, and wasting of the testicles . 8S

Causes of the atrophy . . * fX

Secretion and character of the semen or seed . .28

Animalcule or spermatozoa in the seed . . .89

In that of mules or hybrids . ,29

Of the seminal yesides . • .SI

Of the fluid they contain . • . .33

Of the cgaonlatory duct . • • • . 38

Seminal Tesicles in animals, and their OSes . .33

Of the prostrate, and the fluid it secretes .3ft

Of Cowper's glands ...... 39

Of the urethra, and its seTeral portions • .39

Of the penis ...... 49

Of the oayemous and spongy bodies . . . .41

Of the glans penis . . .41

Ckmdition of the penis during coition : : 42

ObseryatUms on puberty, and the ehanges it effBCts 43

BoqilanatioBof tkepktai \ ^



IV.



CONTENTS.



ONANISM AND ITS CONSEQUENC?ES,



Condemned by all writen : :

Prodaces exhaustion of the system ;

Causes a state of nervous excitement

Constant irritation of the system

Nocturnal emissions and impotence :

The injurious consequences of the act

Buffon's opinion

Causes of Onanism .

Hippocrates on tabes dorsalis

Aetius, Lommius, Tulpius, and De Louvain's opinions

Symptoms and consequences of tabes dorsalis

Effects on the mind and body ;

Opinions of a learned Physician on tabes dorsalis

Shrinking of the penis from Onanism

Onanism, the cause of indigestion

Disturbance of respiration .

Hypochondriac melancholy •

Celsus and Galen on Onanism

The case of a Swiss nobleman

byTulpius.

Disordered action of the heart and eye-sight

Hoffman's case . . .

Onanism the cause of deafiiess •

Boerhaave*8 case

Dangerous effects of Onanism . .

Sanctorius* opinion . ' . .

Various forms of disease resulting from Onanism

Case of L. D. • .

Extracts from correspondence

Method of treatment and cure

Necessity of abandoning the practice of Onanism

Co&DiAL Balm ov Striacuii ; its effects in case of

resulting from self-pollution
Nocturnal pollutions . . ;

Characters of seminal weakness :
Qualities of the Cordial Balm of Stbiacum .
Fluor albus, or the whites . : .

— symptoms and effects : :

•— treatment of ;

Impotence . ; ; : :

— ^— — causes : . : :

' want of action and redaction in the genital organs



debUity,



Paos.
fiO
SO
62

M
55
55
56
57
59

eo

61,72
63,69
(H
68
7D
70
71
7S
Tl

n

76
75
77
78,80
78,80
80
83
85
88
88

89
S9
94
100
101
101
102
102
102

loa



COKTSMI«^



V.



Impotence, caused by excess in, and abstinence from sexual in-
dulgence ....
— — incuiration of the penis .



lA*



Page.

103
IM

105
106



Adranti^ges of the Cordial Balm of Stbiacum, combined

with cold batbing . : . :

flterilitj or barrenness ; : ; :

• ' • ' Cordial Balm of Striagum in the

treatment of : : '> ; 108

Scriptural authorities against Onsnlsm, etc. . : 109

General instructions for taking the Cordial Balm of Stri-

ACUM . : : : c 113,118

Begnlatlon of «leep 119

— *^— - of diet . ■. : . IH

l%e cold bath :..;,; 115



VENEREAL AND SYPHILITIC DISEASES.



General obserrations

Introduction of the disease into the sjrstem

Consequences of infection .

Order in which the venereal ^frmptoms appear

First ajppearance of the disease

Oar special attention directed to4tp treatment

Gonorrhea or clap . . ■ .

■■■ its nature and treatment ,

Chordee ....

Fbymosis and paraphymoliB

Swelled testicle

Buboes or swelling in the groin

Gleet, its nature and treatment .

Mucus gleet

Gonorrheal ophthalmia and coryta .

Stricture, nature of

— — , spsmodic, causes and seat of

, permanent, causes and treatment

Incidental diseases .
Venereal contamination
CoNCBNTRATivB DsTBRsiYB remedy

directiens for taking

—————— ——^ important observations

use of . . . .

Syphilis or pox, and secondary symptoms
Chancres or ulcers and theix tieatmenl



on the



120

m
m

184
136
136
127, 131
131
138
138
130

140
142
144
144
145
146
147
149
149
150
151

152
153



Tl.



CONTBNTSi



Syphilitic babo

Warts and their mode of etm

Venereal eraptions of the face and skin

■ sore throat

Affections of the bones

Venereal ulcers and sores . •

Cleanliness. •



155
W7
157
159
100
151
162



Obsbbvatiovs on tbb bvfbcts or mbbcubt, wbbv bmplotbd

IV THB TB&ITMBITT . OF STPBXLXS OB POX, WITH
D1BRCT10N8 FOB PBOPBB TBBATMBNT . . ;

Use of the Concbntbated Dbtbbsitb Essbncb



163
165



Fbbbt's Fbbvbntativb Lotion
The danger of infectiom
Means of prevention
Directions fbr the use of the lotion



166
166
168
168



On Mabbtaob

Nature and obligations of marriage .
Injurious effects of sexual excesses .
Use of the Cobdxal Balm of Stbucum
The frequency of sexual intercourse • *
The phenomena of imprognalion •
Cases «...
Notice to patients • •



169
170

171. 178
172
173
174
179

. 189



CONTENTS. VU,



PLATES.



FRONTISPIEGE— a front yiew of the anatomy of the abdomen, penis,

and organs of generation.

Paob.
Flats I— A side riew of the pelvis and its contents • . 48

Flats S—Represents the special organs of generation . . 48

Flats 3— Represents the special organs of generation, including

the penis, and also the bladder and prostate . 48

Flats 4— Represents the relaxed state of the penis and testicles

from Onanism . : . . .06

Flats 6— Ilg. 1 represents the appearance of the features where
the practice of self-pollution has caused general
debility ; fig. S represents the appearance of the
features in the last stage of debility from self-
pollution . : . .83

Flats 0— >Fig. 1, ulcerated pustules on the scrotum, thighs, etc. :

fig. S, sympathetic buboes . • . 14S

Flats 7— Fig. 1, syphilitic phymosis : fig. 2, syphilitic paraphy-
mosiB, with gonorrhea : fig. 3, gonorrhea with chor-
dee: fig. 4, swelled testicle consequent on gon-
orrhea: fig. fl^ syphilitic chancres . .138

Flats 8— Stricture of the urethra .... 148

Flats 9— Enlargement of the prostrate, with pouches in the

urethra - . . .148

Plats 10— Fig. 1, representing yenereal chancre in cases of se-
condary symptoms : fig 2, represents the appearance
of the face under venereal influence, where the
nose is afi'ected, and likely to be destroyed IfiS

Plats 11— Fig 1, represents venereal erup^ons on the face after
suppuration : fig. 2, represents venereal eruptions
on the face as they appear previous to suppuration 158

Plats Id— Fig. 1, destruction of the palate from syphilis : fig 2,

gonorrheal ophthalmia and coryza . . 150

Flats 19— Fig. 1, represents nodes or swellings on the bones, and
the inflamed appearance of the skin caused by
mercury : flg 2, represents the appearance of deep
seated ulcerations of the neck and tbx5M^ tt<($i&. ^^
indisciimixMte >iBe oi m«t«^!a^ « « <" ^^'^



INTRODUCTION.



In commencing our remarks on the highly important
subject of Self-Pollution, we cannot impress too
strongly on our readers the Divine ordinance, ** increase
and multiply ; " for by constantly bearing in mind the
object for which we were sent into this world, it will at
once be seen how sinful must be the practice of those,
who by fatally anticipating the purposes of Nature, are
rendered incapable of procreation, and entail everlasting
misery, shame and ignominy on themselves here and
hereafter. The seminal liquori it must be observed, is
the richest and most powerful of aU the animal secre-
tions ; it is, in fact, the very essence of life ; it is this
fluid that strengthens our bodies, and, by rendering the
nervous system powerful, enables us to exercise our
memory, imagination, and judgment for our worldly
benefit and happiness. Now, if this important fluid be
wasted in a manner which nature never intended, and
by which not only the fluid itself is lost, but the ner-
vous energy is also impaired and exhausted by undue
excitement, what results must follow ? In the fbrst place
the nervous system of the masturbator becomes impaired,
the brain, the heart, the lungs become impoverished,
and hence arise melancholy, impotence, a bewildered
mind, nervousness, and a general decay of the system.
'Tis then that the truth flashes across the mind, and
the miserable victim of folly becomes aware of the ex-
treme wretchedness of his situation, and that he is no
longer a flt object for society ; a complete imbecile,
incapable of sexual intercourse ; a man only in form,
but not in substance, without the power of exercising
his functions either of mind or body : the former '^'«:t«
tidpating in the disea8e> become mot\A!^^ ^SSarXk^^ ^so^



X INTRODUCTION.

distrust, fear, extreme sensitiveness, and frequently
madness ensue.

Here then arises a proof of the importance and neces-
sity of the arrangement whereby some well informed
members of the medical profession, may devote their
exclusive attention to diseases, arising from the undue
excitement of the generative system, together vnth
those incidental stages of acute disorder, which, if neg-
lected, terminate in the horribly wasting forms of
constitutional disorganization.

To this part of the subject we have paid the most
anxious and untiring attention from a very early period
' of our professional career. It is one, in fact, that not a
day passes in which we are not consulted either by pro-
fessional visit, or by correspondents in different parts of
the kingdom, and we feel diat we are not exceeding the
limits of truth, or transgressing the bounds of profes-
sional etiquette, in asserting that our mode of practice,
suggested and improved by long and multiplied experi^
ence, has been productive of the happiest and most
-successful results in the treatment of sexual debility in
both sexes. During our practice also, we have too
frequently marked tibe great extent of constitutional
' disease, primarily springing from neglect or mal-tretft-
ment of syphilitic diseases. Any medical man who will
make it his study, as it has been ours, to investigate as
far as possible in every case, the origind channel through
which disease or constitutional disorder first found its
entry into the system, vdll be astonished at the mass
of human suffeiing which may be traced to venereal
origin, although its primary symptoms may have been
for years apparently eradicated from the frame. Ndr
do the sources of this misfortune lie very deep from
observation. The malady generally commences its
attack in early life, before experience has overcome the
short-sighted heedlessness of youth, and taught it to
look beyond the pains and pleasures of the passing
moment. Delicacy or shame will not allow the sufferer
to seek assistance, until the poison has acquired a strength
and virulence too alarming to be neglected ; the patient
then, instead of applying to his usual professional friend,
^ea to some iinskilixd practitioner, who temporary



INTRODUCTION. XX

arrests the external symptoms, and discharges him as
cured. Thus matters go on until the malady becomes
constitutional ; when the patient is at last compelled to
place himself under the treatment of those, who, at an
early period, might have preserved his constitution un-
tainted, and his body comparatively iminjured by the
ravages of this insidious disease.

It is some years since the idea first occurred to us
that a popular treatise, divested as much as possible of
technical language, would be of much avail in coun*
teracting the effects of the complaint, resulting from
maltreatment or neglect, by directing attention to its
early symptoms, and by demonstrating as clearly as
possible the consequences resulting from the neglect
thereof — ^by the general contamination of the system
which must necessarily follow. Under this impression
we have ventured to submit the following pages, and
trust their utility may be acknowledged : we are desi-
rous of explaining that they are not intended to super-
sede medical aid in any stage of the disorder, but that,
on the contrary, we would impress upon the reader, if
need be, the prudence of having immediate recourse
to it, in the earliest stages of the disease. But where,
from circumstances, which in venereal complaints very
frequently occur, the party cannot have recourse to
professional aid, the next best step is certainly to place
in his hands those medicines which are most likely to
be successful.

In the following pages we have as briefly as possible
^ven a description of the organs of generation, and
of their physiology, so that any one may readily under-
stand their importance in the general economy ; and
secondly we have brought under the notice of the reader
the catises, varieties^ symptoms, and peculiarities of those
disorders of the generative organs, which either par-
tially or totally obstruct them in the due discharge of
those important functions which they are ordained to
perform in the human system, and on the proper dis-
charge of which not only rests the happiness of indi-
viduals in families, but also the welfare of empires ; for
it is not to be disputed that on the degree of vigour awd.
healthy action of those oxgans in Wve ^^xeviX^^ ^<cs<^^w^



XU INTRODUCTION.

in a great measure the health of their offspring : daily
experience presents to our notice painful and not un-
frequently loathsome evidence of this fact. Hence it
behoves all persons before entering the marriage state,
to enquire whether or not they are in such bodily health
as may ensure that the marriage bed shall not become a
hot bed of disease, whence nought but weak and puny
o£&pring shall be produced — ^living evidences of folly
and brutally selfish passion. How degraded, and utterly
lost to all the finer feelings which alone can ennoble us,
must that man be, who, knowing himself to be tainted
by disease, or so debilitated by early and guilty excesses,
that it is next to impossible that he should give life to
any but tainted and doomed progeny — doomed in the
mother's womb ! who yet dares to offer his polluted and
shattered frame at the pure shrine of female love.

To causes such as these may be traced much of the
domestic unhappiness we daily see, and many of the
serious diseases imder which mankind suffers from one
generation to another : therefore, reader, if you still be
immarried let us beg of you, to ponder well on these
truths — truths, which if you neglect now, may at some
fiiture time painfully and vividly be recalled in your
own family.

The fearfully abused powers of the human generative
system require the most cautious treatment ; our studies
for many years past have been exclusively directed to
the treatment of the debility and diseases resulting firom
self-pollution, venereal infection, loss of sexual power,
and such complaints as arise from a disorganization of
the reproductive powers, whether constitutional or ac-
quired ; and we now point out to suffering humanity
the SILENT FRIEND, as a medical adviser, to be
consulted with assured confidence of success.

R. ^ L. PERRY ^ Co.



THE SILENT FRIEND.



ANATOMY
OF THE ORGANS OF GENERATION.



The great importance of the organs of generation,
and their preservation in a state of health and vigor
have been admitted by the concurrent testimony of
ancient and modern writers ; in fact, the due and
proper performance of the special functions with
which they are charged has ever been considered es-
sentially necessary to the health and well-being of the
economyi both physical and mental. They are parts
of admirable construction, form, and use, and consti-
tute a striking evidence of the wonderful skill and
contrivance in the adaptation of a special mechanism
in the system for the performance of one of its most
important and essential functions, — that of the propa-
gation of the species. Unequalled in the delicacy of
their texture, and the comparative minuteness of their
structure, their peculiar fitness for the functions as-
signed them in the economy, when they are in a state
of perfect integrity, excites the astonishment and ad-
miration, alike of the anatomist and the philosopher.
Their very complexity, while it renders them liable
to many disorders by any of which their utility may
be impaired, is wisely rendered subservient to the im-
portant purpose of separating and purifjdng the vivi-
fying fluid.

Like that complex and delicate piece of machinery,
a watch, constructed by human skill, the organs of
generation in man, — a still more complex and \ss$yt^
delicate apparatus, created by 1i])a.e "DVn^a -v'-^, ^rt^"^^-

B



8 THE SILENT FRIEND.

ble to derangement and impairment of function and
structure from many causes, the nature and effects of
which will be investigated in the following pages. In
order however that these may be fully arid clearly
imderstood, it will, we think, be advisable to preface
the observations we propose hereafter to offer respect-
ing them by some notice of the anatomical arrange-
ment and physiological action of the organs which are
immediately subservient to the function of generation,
and also of those which are only indirectly connected
therewith.

The parts in man which are inunediately connected
with the function just alluded to, are, as has been
already stated, of a complex nature and very delicate
structure. They consist of the testicles, by which the
semen or seed is secreted, and of their appendages,
through which the seminal fluid is transmitted to the
urethra at its origin near the neck of the bladder, and
of the penis or yard, by means of which the act of co-
pulation takes place, and through a canal in the un-
der part of which, called the urethra, the seed is
conveyed from the receptacles in which it is retained, to
those organs in the female, which are engaged in the
function of generation.

The urinary organs, both in the male and female,
may be regarded as subsidiary to this fimction, and
many of the diseases to which they are liable exert
a malificent influence on its performance, and not un-
frequently produce impotence, either temporary or per-
manent, according to the nature and severity of the
disease.

The kidneys, which are the organs solely engaged
in the secretion of the urine, are glandular bodies of
an oblong shape, seated on either side of the spine,
upon and below the two last ribs, and behind the
stomach and intestines ; the right kidney is also under
the liver, when the man is in the erect position, and
the left under Xhe spleen : the right kidney is generally
the lower and the larger. It is said that these organs
are more considerable in size in those persons, whose
j^assions are very strong, and almost imcontrollable, than
tliejr are in those who are less addicted to women.



THE SILENT FRIEND. 9

In shape the kidney resembles the kidney-bean ;
its structure is almost wholly made up of arteries
and veins, with a few small branches of nerves, derived
partly from those which are connected with the ribs,
and thence called intercostal, and partly from a
branch from the stomach, thus causing a great sym-
pathy between those organs. The arteries by which
the kidneys are supplied with blood, which is partly
used for the support of the organ, and partly for the
secretion of urine, is derived directly from the aorta, or
great artery of the body. When it enters the kidney,
which it does about its middle, it divides into
branches, which again are divided into smaller ones, and
these into still smaller, until they terminate in vessels so
exceedingly minute as to be invisible to the naked eye.
From these the veins are formed, and by these the
urine is secreted, and falls by drops into a pouch which
is situated about the middle or lower part of the organ,
and which forms the commencement of the ureter. The
vein joins the great cava vein, and discharges its blood
into what is called by anatomists the great portal
system, by which it is conveyed to the liver, after
it has been freed in the kidney from a certain portion
of its serum, and also from certain salts. The nerves
of the kidneys are few and small, so that the organ is
not endowed with much sensation.

The ureters are long, hollow tubes, and constitute
the continuation of the pelves of the kidneys. There
is one on each side of the body, and they pass down-
wards, and slightly inwards to the back and lower
part of the bladder, which they pierce, running be-
tween its coats for about an inch, so that if the blad-
der should become exceedingly distended, its contents
would not be forced back into these tubes. They are
well supplied with branches of arteries, veins, and
nerves, and their sensibility in a state of disease is
considerable. Their use is to convey the urine from
the kidney into the bladder.

The bladder is situated in the part of the body
called the pelvis. It is of considerable size, and ad-
mits in some instances of distension to a degree that
would hardly be credited, "weie \\. iio\» ^ ^€^^^8S!iss«^



10 TBTE SILENT FRIEKD.

fact. This power however is not acquired without
considerable risk to health and life. This organ in
man lies directly on the bowel, but in women the
womb intervenes between it and the rectum. It is
of an oval shape, constitutes the great receptacle of
the urine, which, when it has collected to such an
amoimt as to become a source of inconvenience, is
by a voluntary effort, got rid of through the urethra,—
a prolongation of the bladder, commencing at its neck,
and extending along the under surface of the penis,
as has been already stated. The bladder is well sup-
plied with arteries, veins, and nerves, and is very
sensitive when in a state of disease. It has three
coats, one of them being composed oi muscular fibres ;
its constriction causes the expulsion of the urine : it
has on that account been called the detrusor urmoe.

The neck of the bladder, which in man is longer
and narrower, and in woman is shorter and wider, is
surrounded by a sphincter muscle, by which the con-
tinual running away of the urine is prevented, uBle|$
from disease the muscle has become useless.

The secretion or separation of the urine from the
blood by vessels appropriated for that purpose, consti-
tutes the principal functions of the kidneys. The fluid,
when secreted is carried along the ureters into the
bladder, — ^the great receptacle in which it is retained
until from its state of distension, its evacuation by the
urethra is required.

The process by whidi the secretion of urine is
effected is one of exceeding interest, and admirably
adapted to display the wisdom of the Divine ma-
chinist. The blood from which it is to be separated,
is conveyed to the organ, as has been already men-
tioned, by the renal artery, which divides into branches
supplying different parts of the organ, and these
again in their turn form arches of communication with
each other, whence spring minute arteries or branch-
lets, these again constituting a complete network c^
vessels by a general inosculation. They terminate in
the commencement of veins, and also in uriniferons
tubes, by which latter the separation of the urine is
e^cted. The crypts or cryftcs^ small round or oval



THE SILENT FRIEND. 11

bodies, which are found everjrwhere in the network
of vessels just spoken of, and which consist almost
solely of vessels, are by some supposed to be the
origin of the uriniferous tubes. The tubes terminate
in a mammillar process, which projects into a small
membranous bag, called from its shape the infundi-
bulum or funnel ; into this bag the urine passes from
the uriniferous tubes, it is thence conveyed to the
larger pouch called the pelvis, and afterwards through
the ureter into the bladder. Several of the tubes
terminate in one mammillar process, and so also several
of the mammillar processes open into one infundibulum.
The last-named pouch, like the pelvis of the kidney,
the ureters, bladder, and urethra, is defended from the
acrimony of the urine by a secretion of mucus which
lines and sheaths its inner coat.

The quantity of urine, and the celerity with which
it is passed ajfter certain fluids have been taken in-
to the stomach, have induced in some persons a
belief that vessels existed, but which have not yet
been discovered, forming an immediate communication
between the stomach and the bladder, unconnected
with the kidneys. But the quickness with which
fluids can be absorbed and conveyed to the thoracic
ducts, the velocity of the circulation, and the great
quantity . of blood carried by the renal arteries to the
kidneys, will account for the celerity with which urine
is separated, without having recourse to the supposi-
tion of unknown channels. From the extensive com-
munication which the nerves of the kidneys have with
those of the alimentary canal, it is not improbable that
the secretion of urine from the blood may commence
before the absorbents have time to carry any quantity
of water, received into the stomach, into the blood-
vessels ; nature being aware that these vessels would
be overcharged, did not a separation of some of the
watery fluid already in them immediately begin.

That the secretion of the kidneys is much influenced
by passions and ideas of the mind we need only in-
stance in proof, the eflects of fear on quadrupeds,
infants, and even on adult men in sudd^ikV^ Ycv$:x^^\£k%
the qvumtity of urime, and ptodwciva^ «». \\\awrcasssi2eX-



12 THB SILBNT FRIBKD.

•

able desire to void it. In patients labouring under
some difficnltj from stricture in passing urine, the
mind referring to the complaint will often greatly in-
crease the secretion of that fluid, and multiply the
calls to pass it from the body. This will be exem-
plified in a subsequent chapter.

The renal capsules are concaTO-convex bodies, seated
immediate)/ above the kidneys, imbedded in fat, and
freely supplied with blood principally from the renal
artery, arising directly from the great arterial trunk,
and from other vessels* Its nerves are derived from
the great sympathetic. In the interior there is foimd
a cavity, containing a fluid of a dark saflron colour,
the use oi which and of the renal capsule itself we
are as yet ignorant of.

The prostate gland, of which we shall speak more
frdly, when treating of the anatomy of the organs
specially concerned in generation, is in immediate con-
nexion with the neck of the bladder ; although not in
fact directly engaged in the process of generation, it
is more intimately connected therewith, than any of the
parts which have hitherto been considered. Under the
same head the urethra may be regarded ; it is indeed
more closely connected with generation than the pros-
tate, inasmuch as the seed-receptacles open into it,
and the seed itself is ejected through it. Although
then the prostate and urethra constitute a portion and a
very important one of the urinary organs, a descrip-
tion of their anatomy will be better understood, after
the organs specially engaged in the function of gene-
ration, to wit, the testicles, deferent vessels, seminal
receptacles, etc. have been described.

The scrotum or purse, is a bag of skin, divided
about the middle by a septum, so as to form two cavi-
ties, in each of which a testicle is contained. The
situation of this septum is marked externally by an
irregular line called the raphe. The contraction or
corrugation of the scrotum, which occurs at times, is
said by some anatomists to depend on the action of a
muscle which they call dartos. This however is
denied by others who do not admit the existence of
this muacle.



THX nLXKT rilZND. 18

The testicles, or organs which secrete the semen, are
nourished and supplied with hlood hj long and tenu-
ous vessels which arise from the main arterial trunk,
and are called the spermatic arteries ; the hlood which
they thus receive, serves for the elimination and secre-
tion of the seed, — a process which is effected by the
peeuliar action of the testicles, and which secreting
power affixes to these organs a value and importance
in the human frame, not even second to that which
' attaches to those generally regarded by anatomists as
the more noble, being those the destruction or serious
impairment of the fimctions of which may involve loss
of life. The value which men place on these organs
(the testicles) is rendered evident by the fact that
suicide is not unfrequently caused by their supposed
or real imperfection, and that men on whom tiie op*^
oration of castration has been performed, in conse-
quence of cancerous or other serious disease affecting
the testicles, generally become moping and nielan-
choly, and speedily perish. The same thing occurs
when from a similar cause the penis has been amputated ;
not is the feeling of dejection and extreme wretchedness
consequent on these operations confined to persons in
the prime of life, and previously in the full enjoyment
of tike fimctions of reproduction. Old men, even
those in whom, from the effects of advanced age, all
desire and capacity for sexual intercourse have entirely
ceased, when deprived of these organs by a surgical
proceeding, faU the victims of an insatiable melan-
choly.

£unuchs, who have been castrated prior to the pos-
session of those feelings which nature causes to spring
up in man after the period of puberty, are of course
not subject to the same degree of depression and
wretchedness of mind and body, as are those who are
rendered impotent, after having shared in the hap*
piness and delights of matrimonial intercourse. Their
disgust of life arises from witnessing the comforts
which others enjoy, from which they are for ever debar*
red, and which they have no means of Ailly appre*
ciating. There is also a marked diSet^^<^^ m^^ <s&^
temU characteiisticB of a man axui oi %Xk «»skqi^« ^T^d^



14 THB SILENT FRIEND.

latter are rendered, by the degrading operation to which
they have been subjected, more effeminate in personal
appearance than are those who are in the full vigour
and enjoyment of manhood. The voice resembles
that of children, the hair becomes thin and deli-
cate, the limbs are small, the beard and whiskers
do not grow, or at best are thin and scattered,
and the mental faculties are prevented attaining
either vigour or penetration. Most of these changes
and differences in the constitution not unfrequently
attend the operation of castration, when performed
during manhood, if it be complete, — that is if both
testicles have been removed. They do not however
occur at once, but take place gradually ; erection and
even emission may be effected on more than one oc-
casion, after both the testicles have been removed.
When emission occurs some months after castration has
been performed, it is not seminal, but simply the se-
cretion of the seminal vesicles and the prostate
gland.

The ancient Romans would not allow any one to
bear witness against another in a court of justice, im-
less he were perfect in the organs of generation, —
unless the testicles were sound and entire. The papal
clergy so far carry this rule into effect that no one
can be admitted a member of their priesthood, against
whom a similar defect can with truth be alleged.

It occasionally happens that the testicles which
before birth are lodged within the cavity of the ab-
domen, immediately before the kidneys, do not de-
scend into the scrotum or purse, but remain in the
belly, generally within what is called the abdominal
canal. Sometimes one only is retained in the abdo-
men, and that generally the left. In this situation
they are exposed to various causes of disease, and
although not absolutely deprived of the power of
secreting seed, yet their action is generally more or
less imperfect, in all probability from the compres-
sion they undergo, and the constant irritation to which
they are subject, from the narrowness of the canal
hj which they are in fact somewhat elongated and
fattened, and smaller than usual.



THE. tOLEKT TRISND* 15

An apprentice of the late Sir Astley Cooper, in whom
the testicles had not descended, committed suicide, firom
the fear that he was impotent. His body was examined
after death, and the seminal resides were found to be
fall of semen; the testicles themselyes, which were
both within the abdomen and close to the internal
abdominal ring, being nearly, if not quite of a natural
size. In another case, that of a lad nineteen ytaxs
of age, only one organ was retained in the canity of
the abdomen. It was smaller than its feUuw, but
the ducts, etc. were perfectly healthy.

The non-descent of the testicles from the abdomen
into the purse does not however necessarily inyol^e
the infliction of impotence — the greatest physical curse
to which manhood can be subjected.

The spermatic artery, as has been already remariced,
is giyrai off by the main arterial trunk ; it is a long,
undulating, and tortuous yessel. The blood which is
thus conveyed to the organs, after having been em^
ployed by the testicles for the separation and seeie*
tion of the seed, is re-conveyed in a refuse state by
other vessels, called the spermatic veins, back to the
general circulatory system in the body. The double
set of vessels, the arteries and veins, were called by
the older anatomists the vasa preparantiat as being
the parts principally concerned with the testicles in
the preparation of the seed.

The spermatic arteries are remarkable, besides tiieir
length and tortuosity, for their smaUness, which pre-
vents their containing more than a small quantity of
blood at one time. They pass obliquely downw^urds
and outwards, behind the peritoneum, and are con-
tained in a common protecting sheath with the reins,
forming with the nerves of the testicles what is called
the spermatic chord ; they then run over the psoas
muscles and ureters, £uid pass out through the rings
of the abdomen and abdommal canal, over the oa pubis
or share bone, and into the scrotum, which the sper-
matic artery enters, and, as already remarked, supplieB
the testicle. This organ also receires blood from the <
artery which supplies the ras deferens^

The latter named organ, \v\u«Stx H» \ss<i«9&j^ ^s^l >6&.



16 THE SILENT FRIKND.

own sheath, called by the name tunica vaginalis, is
composed of the body of the testicle, and the epi-
dydimis, the latter being situated at the upper part
Its substance is of a white, soft, and apparently pulpy
nature, but in reality it consists of an infinite numbev
of small tubes, called the seminiferous tubes, which
terminate in the epidydimis. These tubes are con-
voluted on each other, and closely connected together,
but when unravelled, and injected with quicksilver,
will extend to a considerable length.

The spermatic veins arise in three sets from the
testicle, two of which soon unite. They are exceed-
ingly tortuous in their course, and freely anastomose
with each other, while in the lower part of the cord,
but these inter-communications cease after they have
entered the abdominal canal, on leaving which while
crossing the psoas muscle, they unite together, and
form one vein, which on the right side terminates in
the lower vena cava, and on the left in the vein which
arises from the kidney on that side. Their use has
been already mentioned. The larger veins are pro-
vided with valves. The nerves of the testicles are
principally derived from those which supply the kidneys.
They take the same course as the spermatic arteries,
and constitute with them and the veins the spermatic
cord. Some branches of the hjrpogastric plexus join
the spermatic nerves in the cord, and form with them
a kind of network or interlacing with their branches,
which mingle with and embrace the blood vessels sup-
plying the testicles. The spermatic nerves are finally
distributed to the substance of the organ, to the due
performance of the Amction of which they are sub-
sidiary.

The testicles are generally two in number, one on
each side of the scrotum or purse, but cases have been
published in which there has been only one testicle,
and others again there have been found three, four
and even, although very rarely, five testicles. The
older writers, by whom some of these cases have been
mentioned, considered the possessors of so unusual a
number of testicles, to be more than ordinarily salaci-
OU8, This latter statement is moie tliaa doubt&il> end



THE SILBNT FRIEND. 17

it has sometimes happened that a small tumour has
assumed the character and appearance of an additional
testicle. The occasional although rare occurrence of
a third testicle has however heen placed heyond all
douht. Dr. Macann, a staff surgeon in the army,
published an instance of this, which came under his
own observation, a few years since. The person in
whom this anomalous condition took place was a
recruit about twenty years of age, and die additional
organ was on the right side, nearer the groin than
the proper testicle. It had its own spermatic cord,
which joined the cord of the other organ at the upper
parts of the purse, and the vas deferens could be
distinctly felt in each.

Persons having three testicles are called triorchides;
those who possess only one are known in science by
the name of monorchides. These latter cases are
equally rare, and those which are detailed by the older
writers equally doubtful, as the instances of trior-
chides, already alluded to. Some few instances how-
ever have been published by modem authors, and in
some of these the facts having been examined after
death, the non-existence of one of the testicles has
been clearly ascertained. Instances also have been
known in which the unhappy sufferers have been
eunuchs from birth, having been born without either
testicle.

Where these important organs are natural in size,
number, and general appearance, they are generally
nearly two inches in length, one and a half in the
transverse direction, and one in thickness. The tunica
vaginalis or investing membrane of the testicles which
has been already alluded to, consists of two layers, the
inner one direcdy enveloping the testicle. It secretes a
kind of semen, which serves to lubricate it. Between
the two layers of the vaginal tunic is contained the
fluid hydrocele, or dropsy of the purse. In some
eases the cavity formed between €ie two layers of
this membrane remains continuous with the cavity of
the abdomen. In such instances there is the double
danger of the occurrence of ^wliat \& esi2X<^ ^Ksck9^gsisi&jS^



18 THE SILENT FRIEKB.

rapture, and also of the extension of severe inflam-
mation from the cavity of the vaginal tunic to the
abdomen.

Between the testicle and the tunica vaginalis, there
i^ another tunic or coat called the tunica albu^nea».
which is smooth, white, and inelastic, composed of
fibres and structure. It completely covers die testir
de, but not the epididymis. At the upper, back, and
outer part of the organ, it forms a projecting body
oontaining the blood vessels, and part of the glandu-
lar structure of the testicle, as well as the seminsd
ciinals of the rete. AsUey Cooper called it medi-p
aatinum testis. The unyielding character of its tiuiics
is the cause of the intense pain which is experienced,
when the organ is swelled and inflamed. The testi-
cle is also invested and protected by a muscle called
the crenMster, which is formed partly by some of
ihe flbres of the oblique muscles of the abdomen,
and partly arises from the lower part of the spine
of the ilium, and from the pubis. It acts as a
third eo^t or tunic to the testicle. It expands all
round the tunica vaginalis, which it closely embraces,
forming a hollow muscle, within which the testicle
and its tunics are contained, and which, when it is
m action, contracts and draws the organ it encloses
upwards to the abdomen, sustaining and compressing
it, and forcing out along the vas deferens the semen
previously secreted by the organ. The action of this
muscle is principally involuntary, but it has been found
in soipe few instances to be under the control of the
will. The cremaster muscle is small and indistinct
prior to puberty; after that period it is greatly de-
veloped ill persons who are very muscular, and is
exceedingly well marked in cases of old rupture or
hydrocele.

It has been already observed that the substance of
th^. testicle consists of an infinite number of small tubes,
whiph are called the tubuli seminiferiy or seminiferous
tubes. These are very numerous ; their number has
hp&sk oakiilated by Lauth at 840, and their entire mean
length at 1750 feet, the mean length of each duct or



THE SILENT FRIEND. 19

tube being twenty five inches. They communicate
readily with each other, and thus constitute one vast
network of communication. Their calibre is of varying
diameter in different individuals, and is also modified
by the age of the party, and the state of activity or of
rest of the organ itself. They are much larger in an ac-
tive adult in the prime of life, while the organs are in full
Tigoui, than they are in the child or old man. They differ
occasionally also in the testicles of the same individual,
the calibre of the seminiferous tubes in the one testicle
being greater than that of the other. In their course
in the body of the organ, they converge towards the part
described as the mediastinum ; then two or more tubes
unite, and form a conical lobe, the point of which opens
into the mediastinum testis. Of these lobes there are
between four and five hundred in each testicle.

The epididymis, which, it has been stated is seated
at the upper and back part of the testicle, is the con-
tinuation of the numerous seed-bearing tubes ; it
descends along the back of the testicle, gradually be-
comes larger in diameter, but less convoluted until it
begins to ascend, when it obtains the name of vas
deferens. It is longer than the testicle, being about
two inches in length, and four or five lines in width.
It consists principally of seminal canals from which
arise in the ^ter part of the rete testis, the vasa efferentia^
or efferent vessels, of which tubes there are generally
twelve in number, although there be sometimes as many
as thirty. All these ducts, after numerous and close
convolutions, unite with or rather terminate in the
canal of the epididymis. Their average united length
has been estimated by Lauth at nearly eight feet,
the separate length, of each being rather more than
seven inches.

The parts of the epididymis known as its body and
tail, are composed of the convolutions or twistings of its
canal. This latter is very irregular in size and length,
averaging generally when unfolded and drawn out
about twenty feet. It varies greatly both in length and
calibre in different individuals. The walls of this canal,
unlike those of the vasa efferentia, are very s1yow%^ «s!l4.
will bear considerable violence. \\. \«ixKmdX)»i Ssl ^^&sb



20 THE SILENT FRIEND.

canal called the vas deferens or deferent vessel, the
excretory duct of the organ, and is generally narrower
in calibre at the part where it unites with the vas de-
ferens, than in any other part of its course.

There is sometimes a blind canal found connected
with the epididymis or deferent vessel, which has
been called by Haller the vasculum aberrans. It is
as large in diameter as the canal of the epididymis,
and is generally from eight to fourteen inches long,
although it only passes along the cord for two or three
inches, when it either terminates in a dilated extremity,
or else gradually diminishes in size, and finally disap-
pears. It is much convoluted in its course. It is not
of unfrequent occurrence, although in perhaps the
majority of instances it is not present. As many as
three vascula aberrantia have been found. But little
is known of the real use to which this blind canal is
subservient in the economy. By some it has been
supposed to be a supplementary vas deferens ; otherA
again conceive that its office is merely the secretion ot
a fluid to assist in lubricating the part composing the
epididymis, — while others again regard it as a mere
diverticulum^ accidental in its formation, such as is
occasionally met with among the intestines.

The vas deferens or deferent vessel, the excretory
duct of the testicle, forms a constituent part of the
spermatic cord, and is readily distinguished from the
arteries, veins, nerves, and absorbents by its cartilagin-
ous feel. It is Arm and round in shape, and it has
been supposed that its parietes or walls were muscular.
It is continuous with the under part of the epididy-
mis, and ascends along its inner side, forming numer-
ous convolutions until it passes beyond the testicle,
when it joins the spermatic vessels and nerves to form
the cord. It then enters and passes through the ab-
dominal canal ; after which it leaves the cord and
plunges into the pelvis, passing backwards in the form
of an arch on the outside of the peritoneum, to which
it adheres ; it passes first by the side of, and then behind
and below the bladder, inclining gently inwards in
its course, towards the cervix of that viscus, until
At last, about the base of the prostate gland, it comes



THE SILENT FRIEND. 21

in contact, but does not communicate with the vas
deferens of the opposite side. It terminates in the
seminal vesicle, immediately above and behind the
prostate, and with it forms the ejaculatory canal,
which perforates the prostatic part of the urethra. As
the vas deferens approaches its termination in the sem-
inal vesicle, it increases in breadth and capacity, be-
coming again gradually smaller as it reaches the
prostate.

The testicles in the foetus are situated in the ab-
domen, posterior to its lining membrane the perito-
neum, immediately below the kidneys, and in front of the
psoas muscles. The epididymis is about one third
larger relatively to the body of the testicle than it is
in the adult. Connected with each of these organs
while in the foetal state, is a soft solid body of a conical
shape, which is called the gubernaculum. It is at-
tached to the lower ends of the testicle and epididy-
mis, and to the origin of the vas deferens. It passes
out of the abdomen in the course taken by the testicle,
through the inguinal canal and the abdominal rings,
downwards into the scrotum, to which it is attached.
It is surrounded with a layer of muscular fibres, and
is supplied with blood by a branch from the artery of
the vas deferens. The testicle between the fifth and
sixth month of foetal life, is gradually drawn by the
contraction of the muscular fibres enveloping the guber-
naculum and by the action of the cremaster muscle
from its situation near the kidney, upwards towards
the internal abdominal ring. Towards the close of the
seventh month it is generally found at the ring,
traverses the inguinal canal during the next month, and
finally towards the close of Ihe period of pregnancy,
is generally to be discovered in the scrotum. As the
organ progresses through the abdomen and the canal ,
it pushes before it a reflexion of the peritoneum, which
subsequently becomes the tunica vaginalis, which has
been already described. The gubernaculum, mean-
while, gradually becomes everted, and its muscular
fibres constitute a kind of investing covering to the
▼aginal tunic, the remaining portion o€ \^ \«^ija:t^
contributing' to form the loo&e ceSL\x\a.x ^aa&\^fe^^«^'^"^^



22 THS SILENT FRIEITD.

found so abundantly in the scrotum. Its attaclmieiits
to the bottom of the scrotum gradually disappear after
the descent of the organ, which they were intended
to facilitate. Thih however is not always- iiie case. In
some instances in which the testicles have not descended
ftirther than the abdominal ring or the inguinaL canal,
some portion of the gubemaculum may still be in
existence, and may even retain some of its':envelop»
ing muscular fibres.

The non-descent'of both testicles is of comparatively
rare occurrence. When one only has descended, it is
more frequently the right than the left. It sometimes
remains permanently fixed in the situation which it
occupied when the child was born, but it occasionally
descends prior to puberty, most generally between the
second and the tenth year. The descent' - has f been
known to occur soon after birth. Wrisberg mentions
several such instances. The causes of this non-descent
are not at present well known ; tliey may however
depend on the occurrence of abdominal inflammation
prior to birth, or on some imperfection in the muscular
apparatus by which the testicle should be drawn into
the cavity of the scrotum. When the bodies of per-
sons who have been the subjects of this non-descent
have been examined after death, filaments or bands
of greater or less length have been discovered bind-
ing the organ to some of the parts in the abdpmen,
and it has even been found adhering to one? of't^'iin-
testines. This singular cause of the non-descent' of
the testicle can only be attributed to previous inflam-
mation. The small size of the abdominal rings may
also operate as a cause preventive of the descent of
the testicles. An operation has been performed under
such circumstances to relieve the organ, and place
it in the scrotum, and it was followed by success.
It was however attended with great difficulty and in-
convenience, and the cure was very tedious.

The vas deferens in cases of undescended testicle
is generally of exceeding length, so as to present
a greater degree of tortuosity than usual.

With respect to the state of the organ itself, and
its Gtne&a for the purposes of genexaticn^ when ite



THE SILENT FRIEND. 23

descent has not taken place, some observations have
already been made, and the case of a pupil of the
late Sir Astley Cooper adduced, to show that they may
and do possess their powers, and in full integrity. Mr.
Hunter was of opinion that the organs under these
circumstances would be necessarily very imperfect, ' and
perhaps even utterly unserviceable for the purposes for
which they are designed by nature, but the only ckile
which came under his notice in man, in which bo^
testicles were retained in the abdomen proved the con-
trary of his position, since the individual had all the
powers and passions of a man.

Mr. Owen, the celebrated comparative anatomist,
in commenting on the opinions just cited, observes,
** it seems remarkable, that with this experience, Mr.
Hunter should have formed from inconclusive analogy,
and promulgated an opinion tending to occasion so
much unhappiness, as that . which attributes exceeding
imperfection and probable incapacity of performing
their natural functions to testicles which in the human
subject are retained within the abdomen. That there
is nothing in such a situation which necessarily tends
to impair their efficiency is evident, from the number
of animals in which they constantly form part of the
abdominal viscera; and in those in which the testi-
cles naturally pass into the scrotum, their continuance
in the abdomen, according to our author's own observa-
tion, is accompanied only with a difference of size or
shape ; now we may readily suppose that this may
influence the quantity, but not necessarily the quality
of the secretion."

This opinion of Mr. Owen's has been confirmed by
the examination of undescended testicles in other c^ses
besides that of the late Sir Astley Cooper's pupil —
other instances are however mentioned, in whicliV ap-
parently from the non-descent of the testicles, but
not improbably from some other cause, the pasSidns
and feelings peculiar to manhood were not devel^ed,
and in at least one instance of non-descent, the 6rgan
which was the right testicle, when examined after
death, as it lay in the abdomen, a little above the
internal abdominal ring, iwaua ^avxxi!^ \wa\. \a \i^ \Nt^^



24 THE SILENT FRIEND.

than it generally is at the age of two years, and to
present similar anatomical characters. The organ be-
longed to a lad sixteen years old. The left was four
times as large.

In a case which came under the notice of M,
Cloquet, the testicle, the left in this instance, was de-
tained in the inguinal canal. It was flattened, elon-
gated, and in a state of atrophy, in fact so small that
it could not be felt externally. The epididymis was
situated an inch below the testicle, with which it com-
municated by fine white transparent vessels, running
parallel to each other, and formed by the seminiferous
tubes, unravelled, and drawn out. The vas deferens
came off from the lower part of the epididymis, and
entered the inguinal canal, where it passed by the side
of, and internal to the testicles. The organ itself was
contained in a hernial sac. The patient in this case
was forty years of age.

It may be readily understood, and experience sup-
ports the opinion, that, although the retention of the
testicles in the abdomen does not generally impair their
generative powers, yet if they be detained in the in-
guinal canal itself, where they are subject to con-
tinual compression, and exposed to injury from blows,
etc., which they are unable to escape, then their utility
may be impaired, although even then it does not follow
that it must necessarily be lost. The consequences
resulting from their compression or from direct injury
are frequently very severe. Permanent disease in the
organ may also be ultimately induced as their residt.

With respect to this, Mr. Pott, one of the ablest
of English Surgeons, remarks, "I do not know any
particular inconvenience arising from the detention of
a testicle within the cavity of the belly, but the lodg-
ment of it in the groin not only renders it liable to be
hurt by accidental pressure, etc., but when it is so hurt,
may be the cause of its being mistaken for a different
disease, and thereby occasion its being very impro-
perly treated. To which considerations this may be
added, that there is no kind of disease to which the
testicle is liable in its natural situation, but what may
a}so affect it in any or all its unnatural ones.'* The



TH£ SILENT JfKlEMU. Zd

very circumstance to which Mr. Pott refers, actually
occurred in a case to which he was called. A young
sailor, who had one of his testicles detained in the
inguinal canal, injured it by a blow, and the subse-
quent symptoms so resembled those of strangula-
ted hernia in that part of the body, that Mr. Pott
was called in to operate. He- discovered the nature
of the accident, and the patient was cured, fortu-
nately for him, without an operation. Similar cases
have occurred to other surgeons.

It occasionally happens that, independent of their
non-descent, the testicles do not attain their full size
and powers of secreting semen. This state has been
termed an arrest of development, — a phrase the mean-
ing of which is simply that the organs at a certain
period of life prior to puberty, have ceased to grow. A
case has been described of a gentleman, who, when in
his twenty-sixth year had a penis and testicles, which
were not larger than those of a boy eight years old, and
another of a man, thirty years old, in whom those organs
presented a similar appearance. Such instances are
not beyond the influence of medicine, unless perhaps
when they occur in the persons of idiots.

Wasting or diminution in the size and powers of the
organs may occur at any age. The testicle is generally
of the proper shape, although diminished in size, but
feels soft, having lost its elasticity and firmness. It
is pale in texture, and its blood vessels appear to be
less in number, than in the healthy state. The secretion
contained in the seminiferous tubes is entirely devoid of
spermatic granules and spermatozoa, the nature and use
of which will be mentioned in a short time. In some
instances the organ undergoes what is called the fatty
degeneration. The spermatic cord is also generally
affected by the extension of the disease ; the nerves
shrink, the blood vessels are reduced in size and num-
ber it is said, and the cremsister muscle disappears.

When disease of the organ is the cause of its
atrophied condition, it becomes altered in shape, being
uneven and irregular, and sometimes elongated, as well
as diminished in size and weight. The proper glan-
dular structure also seems to have neail'^ \£ tlq\. "^Iid^s^
gether disappeared.



26 THX SILENT FEIEND.

Among the causes of this atrophy of the testicles may
be enumerated impeded circulation, pressure, want of
exercise, and loss of nervous influence, as well as certain
causes which specially affect the organs. Atrophy is
an occasional result of local inflammation, whether
arising from a special cause, or from the transfer of
inflammation to the testicle in cases of mumps. Excess
in sexual intercourse and onanism are also efiicient
causes of an atrophied condition of these important
organs. They will be alluded to more in detail here-
after. It is generally preceded by a low kind of local
inflammation.

Injuries of the head, especially of the back part,
have not unfrequently been the cause of atrophy of
these organs, and it has been known to occur without
any apparent cause.

The fact that injuries of a severe nature affecting
the back part of the head are followed by such a result
would tend to support the views of the phrenologists
that the seat of sexual desire is in the cerebellum, which
is there located, and between which and the organs of
generation they say there is great sympathy. The
brain either in its entire, or in that particular part
of it, undoubtedly exercises great influence on the
desire for sexual intercourse. In fact the influence
of the mind on the organs of generation, and of the
latter on the mind is completely reciprocal.

So much similitude is there in the structure of the
brain and of the testicle, as well as a most extraordi-
nary sympathy between them, that experience in the
course of a practice extending through a series of years,
has demonstrated that there are many cases where
the human mind suffers under a species of derangement,
in consequence of diseases of the organs of generation,
especially a tabes dorsalis, and for this solid reasons may
and will hereafter be given.

The vas deferens, a duct as important as the testicle
is itself, inasmuch as it is the canal through which the
semen is conveyed to the seminal vesicles, is occasion-
ally, but rarely, imperfect, or greatly deficient in some
part of its course. It sometimes terminates in a cul-
de-sac, more or less near the organ from which it



THE SILENT F&IEKE. 28

arises. In some instances when this occurs, the tes-
ticle itself is imperfect, in others, in appearance at least
it seems to be healthy, and the seminiferous tubes con-
tain semen abounding in spermatozoa. Sometimes the
epididymis is altogether absent, or partially imper-
fect. Occasionally the vas deferens is of unnatural
shortness, and terminates in a seminal vesicle, not situ-
ated in its ordinary place, and totally unconnected with
the urethra. All these constitute serious and important
impairments of the generative functions, because
although the testicle itself may be perfect in its struc-
ture, and fully capable of performing its duties, still
is it rendered useless if its deferent duct be imperfect.
Fortunately however such deficiencies are of rare oc-
currence, and when they are met with, are generally
found to affect one organ only, leaving the other fit
and capable for efficient action.

The semen, or fiuid secreted by the testicles, is
always when evacuated, mixed with the secretions (rf
other structures, such as those of the seminal vesicles,
the prostate gland, and the mucous glands of the
urethra. To examine semen in its pure state, it should
be obtained from the deferent vessels of an animal
recently dead, in whom death has ensued from accident
or intention, and not from disease.

On examination, the seminal fiuid is found to pos-
sess many of the properties of other animal mucilages.
It is of a blueish-white color, and nearly of the con-
sistence of cream, but more unequal. That which is
first discharged by living animals has nearly the pro-
perties of what is found in the vasa deferentia and other
vessels of the testicles ; it is whiter and more opaque,
while that which follows more resembles the common
mucus of the nose, but is less viscid. It has, when
first voided, a peculiar heavy smell, which has been
compared to that of the farina of the Spanish ches-
nut. This odor appears to be derived from the secre-
tions of the seminal vesicles, prostate and mucous
glands of the urethra, as pure seiflen obtained from
the epididymis or deferent vessel has not any such
smell. Its taste is said by one of our most eminent
phjsiplogists to be at fttal Yaav^\!^> m^V^^^'^. >,



27 THB SILENT FRIEND.

eertain degree of pungency ; after a little time it stimu-
lates and excites a degree of warmth in the mouth.
Vauquelin describes it £is having a sharp and slightly as-
tringent taste. Its specific gravity is greater than that of
any other fluid in the body ; it sinks in water, is coagu-
lable by alcohol, is soluble in nitric and sulphuric acids, is
softened by vegetable acids, evaporates by heat, loses its
Tiscidity on the addition of lime water, which how-
ever is increased by potash and soda, and it is thickened
by ammonia. When exposed to air, it soon liquefies,
and then becomes specifically lighter than before, but
it always remains heavier than water. When it does
liquefy, it will combine with water at any temperature,
but it will not do so at the time of ejection, nor will
water dissolve it at any temperature, from zero to
the boiling point, if it have not been previously
liquefied.

According to the detailed experiments of Vauquelin,
which were published in the Annales de Chemie for
1791, and which have been quoted by Fourcroy,
Richerand, and others, human semen appears to be
composed of ninety parts of water, six o^ common
animal mucilage, three of phosphate of lime, and one
of soda. It exhibits a very marked alcaline chaiacter,
changing the syrup of violets green, owing to the soda
which it contains. The animal mucilage is not pure
albumen : but Richerand observes it should rather be
considered as a gelatinous mucus, on which its indis-
solubility in water, its odour, and spontaneous lique-
faction seem to depend.

The application of the powers of the microscope to
semen has shewn that very minute bodies swim in it ;
these move with rapidity, and from their various
motions, from their avoiding obstacles, their retrogres-
sion, and change of velocity, they have been regarded
as animalculae. They are formed like a tadpole, with
a round head or body and a narrow tail. They are
found in very great numbers in healthy seminal fluid,
and closely crowded together. Ludovic Haume is
said to have been the discoverer of these animalculse,
and to have shewn them to Lewenhoeck in 1677.
Lewenhoeck has claimed the discovery as his own.



THE SILENT FRIEND. 29

These animalculse are not found, it is said, in the
fluid contained in the seminal organs before puberty ;
but are always present afterward, and do not disappear
while man retains the power of procreation, having
been met with in persons of a very advanced age ;
they are stated to be either imperfect or altogether
wanting in that of mules. The more general charac-
ter with respect to these tadpoles in the semen of
mules is that they are greatly deficient in number, and
very imperfect in their formation. Some physiologists
have asserted that they are also absent from the semen
of persons who are suffering from, or have been much
debilitated by continual disease. The theories which
have been formed respecting their nature and uses have
been very various.

These animalculae or tadpoles are now called sper-
matozotty as it is yet a question among physiologists
whether they are independent parasitic animals, or
merely animated particles of the organism in which
they exist. A spermatozoa consists of a flattened
oval and perfectly transparent body ; terminating in a
filiform tapering tail, which together measure from
one-fiftieth to one-fortieth of a line in length. Wagner
has shewn that they are developed within cells, and
originate from the spermatic granules, being formed by
the dispersion of the nuclei of these cells.

These animalculae are peculiar to the spermatic fluid,
and constitute the chief characteristic of this secretion.
They live for many hours after they have been ejected
from the urethra ; the application of blood does not
injure them, but that of urine renders their motions
feeble and hastens their death.

The spermatic fluid also contains a number of
minute, round, colourless, granular corpuscles, which
vary in quantity, but are usually much less numerous
than the spermatozoa. Both these elements of the
sperm are suspended in a clear transparent fluid
termed the Hqov/r seminis, or seminal liquor. The^
quantity of seminal fluid emitted during the act of
sexual congress varies from one to two or three
drachms.

There is a singular fact coTiiiec\i&^ ^m^ ^^Xas^ssc^



3D tHE SILENT FRIEtfD.

of these animalculae, that they have beftn discovered in
very large numbers, and in a very lively state on more
than one occasion in the fluid removed by operation
from, hydrocele, both simple .and encysted. In the
former or simple hydrocele, their presence has been
attributed to a wound of the testicle by the instrument
used in operating, and in the encysted form, it is
supposed that it is owing to a rupture of one of the
seminal tubuli.

It has been already remarked that the tadpoles or
spermatozoa are imperfect or deficient in the semen of
mules, or hybrid animals. Hence depends in all
probability the impotence or sterility of those creatures.
They are generally utterly incapable of generation.
There are however instances, both among the mam-
malia and birds, of individuals belonging to species
universally held to be distinct, uniting and producing
young, which again were prolific. That the mule can
engender with the mare, and that the she-mule can
conceive, was known to Aristotle. The circumstance
is said to occur more frequently in warm countries ;
but it has taken place in Scotland. Bufibn states that
the ofispring of the he-goat and ewe possesses perfect
powers of reproduction. We might expect these
animals, with the addition also of the chamois, to cop-
ulate together easily, because they are nearly of the
same size, very similar in internal structure, and ac-
customed to artificial domestic life, and to the society
of each other from birth upwards. There is a similar
facility in some birds, where such unions are often
fruitful, and produce prolific offspring. The cock and
hen canary birds produce with the hen and cock siskin
and goldfinch ; the hen canary produces with the cock
chaffinch, bullfinch, yellow hanimer, and sparrow. The
progeny in all these cases is prolific, and breeds not
only with both the species from which they spring, but
likewise with each other. The common cock and the
hen parti idge as well as the cock and guinea hen, and
the pheasant and the hen can produce together.

Notwithstanding all these and perhaps other exam-
ples which might yet be adduced, the general rule is
.tbst hybrids are incompetent to perform the act of



THE SILENT FRIEKD. "Si

generation, so as to produce offspring, and it is a wise
provision of nature that such should be the case, to
'prevent the world being inhabited by monstrous crea^
tures, as would be the case, were it the general rule
that fecundation followed the act of copulation, when
practised by the offspring of parents of different species.

The Desiculce seminales or seminal vesicles are two
sacs or oblique bags, behind and below the bladder,
between it and the rectum, and closely connected with
it by cellular tissue. That part which is applied against
the bladder is concave, the opposite surface convex.
They occupy an oblique position, their lower ex-
tremities being separated only by the deferent vessels,
while their upper ends are at a considerable distance
from each other. The latter are the larger, and their
greatest breadth is generally three or four times less
than their length ; and their thickness is about one third
of their breadth. They are about three fingers' breadth
in length. Their size varies in different men, but
this variation does not seem to depend upon bodily
height, for in some men of short stature, they are
in every respect larger than in others who are tall. Their
external appearance is unequal, in consequence of their
consisting of several convolution^, which by long mace-
ration and careful dissection may be unfolded, when
they will appear as long vessels with openings on the
sides, which originally were so applied as to corres-
pond with each other, and, to permit the contents of
the vesicles to pass through them from one part of the
tube to the other. When distended they apparently
consist of large irregular cells ; this is more distinctly
seen when they have been inflated, and dried, and then
laid open.

The vesiculae seminales have two coats, the outer
one of which presents a muscular appearance in man,
and is exceedingly well marked in some quadrupeds ;
the inner coat is much more vascular, and is every
where on its inner sur£Eu;e formed into small cells of a
honeycombed appearance, from which there are short
projecting villi ; these cells are irregular both in size
and shape, and are not dissimilar to those on the Ivlsm^xl
■surface of the gall-bladder and \iV!iiw5 ^\xfiX&\ ^^\sasRst

D



32 THE SILENT FRIEKP#

coat has thus every appearance of being, and no doubt
is, a secreting membrane. The seminal vesicles are well
supplied with arteries, veins, nerves, and absorbents.
Near the prostate the cells cease to appear ; the
vesicle contracts, and forms a kind of duct, which
unites with the vas deferens at a very acute angle, the
place of union being marked by a projecting septum,
or valve, by which the contents of the deferent vessel
are directed into the seminal vesicle.

The ejaculatory duct, thus formed by the union of
the vas deferens and seminal vesicle, is from half an
inch to three quarters long ; it continues to become
narrower as it passes behind the third lobe of the pros-
tate, perforates that body, and, running some way
along the under surface of the urethra, enters that
canal obliquely by a small opening on the side of the
caput gallinaginis.

The junction of the two vessels which form this
common duct is such, notwithstanding the acuteness
of the angle, that air gently thrown into the vas de-
ferens by a blow-pipe, will inflate the seminal vesi-
cle before it enters flie urethra, but if thrown in with
violence, it will immediately inflate both the urethra,
and the seminal vesicle.

When the fluid contained in the seminal vesicles is
examined, it appears of a brownish color, and much
thinner than the fluid found in the deferent vessels ;
it varies both in consistence and color in different parts
of the vesicle. In smell it does not resemble the se-
»men ; nor does it, like the semen, become more fluid
by being exposed to the air. In bodies which have
been dead some time the color is of a darker brown
color ; this might be supposed to arise from the con-
tents in the vesicle having undergone a change in
their sensible properties from putrefaction ; but when
the contents of the vesicle and deferent vessel of the
same side have been compared, they have been found
to be different in appearance, and in other properties.
Hunter examined the contents of the seminal vesicles
in some cases very soon after death, and found that
although of a lighter color than usual, there was not
anjr smell like that which is so peculiar to the semen.



THE SILENT FRIEND. 33

He therefore concluded that the seminal vesicles did
not serve as receptacles for semen, but simply secreted
a kind of mucus of their own ; and although their
peculiar use had not been ascertained, it was, he thought,
reasonable on the whole to conclude, that they were to-
gether with other parts, subservient to the purposes
of generation. As additional reasons for entertaining
the opinion that the seminal vesicle did not act as a
seed-reservoir, Hunter ascertained that their peculiar
contents were always found in the vesicles of those
persons, who, for some reason or other, had undergone
castration of one of the testicles.

The seminal vesicles in animals present many pecu-
liarities, and in some they are altogether absent. In
the horse, they have not any conmiunication with the
vas deferens, or at all events the common passage is
so short as not to admit of regurgitation from the vas
deferens. They are not of the same size in the geld-
ing and the stallion, being larger in the latter, but
the contents are similar and nearly equal in quantity
in each. They are very large in the boar, and divided
into cells of a considerable extent, having one com-
inon duct. They have no communication with the
deferent vessel, and their contents are dissimilar.
Neither have they any communication with the vas
deferens in the rat, nor in the beaver — ^in the latter
they open on the caput gallinaginis, and are con-
voluted. In the guinea pig they constitute long cy-
lindrical tubes, and have not any communication with
the deferent vessels.

These facts however do not afford a demonstrative
JEind conclusive proof that in the human subject the
seed may not pass into the vesicles from the deferent
vessels. There is no anatomical or mechanical structure
calculated to prevent such occurrence ; for, notwith-
standing the acuteness of the angle between the two
vessels at their junction, from the length of the com-
mon tube, the wideness of that part of it formed by
the vesicle where the two vessels meet, and the very
^mall aperture by which it opens into the urethra, the
fluid (which from the length and contortion of the
fiemmal tubes, must pass vety %\a^\y ixooL^^Xfe^^^^^



34 THE 8ILEND FRIEND*

vnH insinnate itself much more readily through the
large communication with the vesicle, than through the
very small one with the urethra, unless it he prevented
firom so doing by the vesicle attempting to throw its
contents into the urethra at the same time. During
coition this attempt is made, and both fluids pass at
once into the urethra, where the fluid secreted by the
vesicles being added to that coming from the testicles
by the deferent vessels, between them a proper quantity
is produced to distend sufficiently the sinus of the
urethra, that the muscles of ejection may act on its con-
tents with more power.

The some effect may be produced, whether the de-
ferent vessels and seminal vesicles communicate or
not, provided that they both open near each other into
the urethra, and both convey their contents to it at the
same time*

- In lihe dead body it has often been found that air
or any fluid when not thrown into the vas deferens
with much force, wiU fill the vesicle before it enters
the canal of the urethra, and on examining the con-
tents of the vesicles, although the fluid contained near
the fundus differs in color, consistence, and smell from
the semen, yet that found near the neck is often very
similar to it ; or to the fluid contained in the enlarged
extremities of the deferent vessels.

From the frequent excitement of the passions and
their gratification being denied in the civilized state
of human society, fluid must often be secreted in the
testicles at times when it cannot be naturally evacuated ;
and although the accumulation of it in this organ some-
times produces tension and pain, the fulness of the
vessels often subsides without these unpleasant symp-
toms having taken place. Thus, when the vis a tergo
BO longer drives the semen slowly on, the muscular
properties of the vas deferens may assist in conveying
that fluid on towards the vesicles, which may receive
it until the time of ejectment arrives. They may thus,
Wider particular circumstances, more likely to occur
in the human species than in brutes, be employed as
ireservoirs, although their ordinary use may be to
0^ctete 4 &vid which mixing with the semen during



TBE SIL£KT FRIEND. 35

cmtion, may render die act more perfect, and more
likely therefore to produce fecundation.

An additional reason may be adduced in support of
the theory that the seminal vesicles act as reservoirs
for the seed in man, in the well-known fact that ani-
mals possessing a penis, but destitute of seminal
Tesicles, remain for a long time in sexual contact, be-
<!ause the fluid necessary for fecundation, from the long
course it has to take during copulation, only flows from
the urethra drop by drop.

A distinct communication between the seminal vesi-
cles and the deferent vessels takes place only in man,
and in those animals which most resemble him in
fbrm, as in the whole tribe of the simiae. The vesicles
are altogether absent in the lion, panther, cat, and
dog. ,

Lawrence, in his lectures on the physiology of man
observes ; " because the vesiculae seminales in some
animals, do not communicate with the vasa deferentia,
and therefore cannot receive the fluid secreted in the
testicles, it has been inferred that they do not serve the
purpose of reservoirs for the seminal secretion in man ;
where however they have so free a communication
with the vasa deferentia, that any fluids pass into and
even distend the former, before they go on into the
urethra. The organic arrangement is different in
the two instances, and this difference leads us to expect
■a modification in the functions, instead of authorizing
us to infer that the same office is executed in exactly
the same manner in both cases. If we met with
animals in whom the cystic duct opened into the
small intestines separately from the hepatic, shall we
therefore infer that the human gall bladder is not
-a receptacle for the hepatic bile ? '*

The prostate, of which a brief mention has already
been made, in shape and size somewhat resembles a
chesnut. It is situated below and behind the bladder,
and above and in front of the rectum. The base in-
clines upwards and backwards, the apex pointing down-
wards and forwards. A notch in the Baiddle of the
base divides the prostate into two kAj^xiH ^xiJa'Ks*^ xk^-
mediately above which ate llae \cfwe^X. ^^\a <25l '^^



36 THE SILENT FRIEND.

deferent vessels and seminal vesicles, the ducts of
which begin to perforate the gland in the middle of
&e notch, and then pass into the under part of the
urethra, where it is surrounded by the substance of the
gland. The neck of the bladder is surrounded by the
prostate, as is also the commencement of the urethra,
which thence obtains the name of the prostatic portion.

The gland is connected with the S3rmphysis pubis and
its descending rami by a strong fascia, and by planes
of muscular fibres, which serve to support it, and by
pressing on it during their contraction, aid in passing
the secreted fluid from it into the urethra. Its sub-
stance is firm and compact, and when cut into gives
the sensation of dividing cartilage. It is whiter in
its substance than that of any other gland.

Behind the commencement of the urethra, between
the passage of the ducts from the deferent vessels and
the seminal vesicles, there is a portion of the prostate
which is connected with both ihe lateral lobes ; this
portion is occasionally called the third lobe of the
prostate. When the gland becomes enlarged from
disease, this part presses upwards towards tiie cavity
of the bladder, immediately behind the commencement
of the urethra, and occasionally bends over that openings
acting as a sort of valve to prevent the expulsion of
the urine.

The prostate is supplied with blood by branches
from the internal pudic ; they are comparatively few in
number. Its veins and absorbents are numerous, and
empty themselves into those which are connected with
the bladder. The nerves of the prostate are branches
from the intercostal plexus, which unite with others
firom the fourth and fifth sacral nerves.

The secreting stracture approaches to that of the
conglomerate glands, and consists of minute cells, from
which small ducts arise and unite with each other,
so as to form several vessels which terminate by
separate orifices by the side of the caput gallinaginis.
The fluid which is secreted is of a white or rather
of a cream colour ; in the dead body it is rather
darker in colour ; it is viscid, and has a slightly salt
^^, When the passage q{ the urethra through the



THE SILENT FRIEND. ^

gland is slit open from before, and the substance of the
gland is squeezed, this fluid may be seen to issue
from, several pores in the under surface of the canal.
Its use seems to be to lubricate the surface of the
urethra, along which the semen is to pass. It is
thrown out in considerable quantity, when the parts
are in a state fit for immediate copulation ; much of it
then unites with the seminal fluid, and is discharged
with that fluid when emission takes place.

The fluid of the prostate, like that of the seminal
vesicles, is not absolutely necessary for the purposes of
generation, in all animals which possess testicles ; for
although the gland is found in man, and the tribes of
the simiae, the lion, dog, etc., it is not present in the
buU, the buck, and ram, and goat, and most probably
in all ruminating animals. In these latter the coatis
of the seminal vesicles are thicker and more glandular
than in those animals who have prostates. Hunter
is therefore of opinion that the seminal vesicles answer
nearly the same purpose as the prostate. Both the
gland and the vesicles are wanting in birds and
amphibious animals, and in flsh which have testicles,
as the ray kind. The prostate is said to be double
in the elephant, camel, horse, and some other animals.

The semen is evacuated into that part of the urethra
which is encompassed with the excretory ducts of the
prostate gland, which discharges its secretion by twenty-
four small orifices into the urethra, at the tune when
the semen is ejected; six of these excretory orifices
being placed before the three apertures through which
the seed is emitted, six of them behind those apertures,
and six on each side. Hence the seed is never evacu-
ated, but when the liquor of the prostate gland goes
before, and follows after. It is obvious, therefore, how
powerfully it must conduce to health, to have the secre-
tion of this gland in a sound and pure state, as it ia
so intimately connected with the finest functions in the
animal economy. The seed and secretion of the pros-
tate gland are intimately mixed together in the urethra,
and the latter is occasionally absorbed into the seminal
vesicles themselves ; for these vesicles and ^Tos^^n^jb.
gland «re encompassed by tiie ^me TawaKvi^^ ^saassox-



dS tH£ SltfiNT F&IEKO.

brane. The humour, formed by the prostate gland^
when in a sound and healthy state, is mild or balsamic,
isomewhat oily and white ; but when it becomes diseas-
ed, it has the appearance of putrid matter from an
tdcer, although no ulcer on those parts may exist. It
is most plentifully secreted in gooid health, and its ac<»
tion continues after the testicles have been taken away,
but it is not then in the least prolific ; hence it seems
intended, by nature, to be a vehicle to dilute, nourish,
and convey the thick and ash-coloured concocted
semen.

We have sometimes seen, in the most healthy men
who have long abstained from venery, a copioti run-
ning of the humour of this gland, from its being in
a relaxed state, during which the semen will be emitted
by the slightest effort, and from ideas of the mind,
especially during sleep ; which has often proved the
cause of an atrophy, or consumption, when effectual
aid has not been procured. The sooner the patient
gets this relaxed state of the gland restored the better.
We have sometimes been consulted where surgeons
had been treating the patient as if this humour from
the prostate gland was venereal. Errors of this kind
have done great mischief. This humour flows from the
prostate gland only, and it distils slowly without any
ejaculation, contrary to the semen, from which it dif-
fers. Hence we observe, that this humour is not want-
ing in eunuchs, when they have an erection ; and the
same liquor sometimes distils from geldings when they
strive to leap.

This secretion, which appears like semen in castrated
animals, is absolutely unprolific, and destitute of every
virtue for procreation. But although it does not con-
tain any prolific virtue, yet good semen is not formed
when those parts are corroded ; so that great caution
should be observed, by all those entering the marriage
state, to be well assured that this humour of the pros-
tate gland is in a sound and healthy state ; for various
evils may arise in consequence, and especially sterility.
Many a fine estate has been deprived of an heir, as
well as titles made extinct, from that cause, the true

condition of things f perhaps, having nevei been dia*
oorered.



THE SILENT FRIEND. 3Q,

. Healthy men condniially separate semen from .the
blood, which being retained and inspissated, like the
white of an egg or starch, would be almost immoyeable,
if it were not for the more thin juice of the prostate
gland, when in a sound state, which mixes with it and
serves to lubricate the urethra almost like an oil. Be-
sides thi9, as the animalcule must stay a long time»
perhaps, before it arrives in the uterus or womb, it
seems necessary for it to be provided with a suitable
aliment ; for, unless nature nourished the animalcule,
when formed, it would certainly perish or become ex-
tinct : and this nutritious liquor is that of the prostate
gland, which in some animals is larger than are the tes-
ticles themselves.

Cowper's glands, which are situate between the bulb
of the urethra and the membranous portion, are
about the size of two small garden peas. They open
into the canal by two small ducts, and appear to
secrete a mucus which serves to lubricate the urethra.
They vary much in size and consistence, and occasion-
ally are not to be found.

The urethra, a membranous canal extending from
the neck of the bladder to the end of the penis or yard,
is divided into the prostatic, membranous, bulbous,
and pendulous portions. Its coats are the same as
those of the bladder ; of which it is apparently a pro^
longation. The first or prostatic portion, commencing
immediately from the neck of the bladder, is sur-
rounded by the prostate, which it enters on the upper
and anterior surface, a little more forwards than the
notch at the base, and proceeds in a slightly incurvated
direction onwards towards the pubes. On the under
part of its internal surface, there is found a prominent
projecting body, called the caput gallinaginis or veru-
montanum, on the sides of which the common ducts of
the deferent vessels and seminal vesicles open into the
canal, as also the ducts of the prostate.

The portion of the urethra between the prostatic and
bulbous portions, is called the membranous, and the rea-
son that has been alleged for this is, because its circuni7
ference is less than that of any other part of the canal.
Its length is generally about axi mc\i) iN\kSSL V^^esaa^Ns^



40 THE SILENT FRIEKD.

in a state of erection ; when otherwise, it is somewhat
less. It is cylindrical in form for about half its length.
The urethra soon after takes the name bulbous, when
it meets with the pendulous portion of the bidb, the
substance of which however it does not enter until it
reaches the arch of the pubes. At this part it is
attached to the symphysis by muscular fibres. These
muscles are influential in the expulsion of the semen.
The urethra at this part enlarges somewhat at its under
part, forming a kind of sinus, in which it has been
supposed the semen may accumulate, until a sufficient
quantity has been collected. The canal - afterwards
bends forwards and is surrounded by the spongy bodies,
through its course along the under surface of the penis.

The whole of the internal surface of the urethra is
abundantly supplied with mucus to defend it from the
acrimony of the urine. It is secreted partly by vessels
which form small projections on the inner surface of
the canal, and partly by glandular structures situated
at the bottom and sides of the very numerous lacunae
or depressions dispersed over every part of the internal
membrane, the openings of which are directed towards
the termination of the urethra, so that the mucus is
pressed out of their cavities by the urine as it flows
from the bladder. These lacunae vary much in size,
the largest being found in greatest nimibers on the
upper surface.

The urethra is very vascular, and possesses a certain
degree of elasticity. Its membranes are very thin, and
almost transparent and without fibres, so that in itself
it does not possess the power of muscular contraction
and relaxation. It is however provided with muscles,
the action of which i# to assist the expulsion of the
tirine, and also of the seed during copulation. The
membranous portion is surrounded by a congeries of
veins, which communicate freely with each other, and
terminate in the veins of the bladder. They are also
connected with the corpus spongiosum. Its length is
generally about twelve inches, but it varies much in
'different individuals.

The penis consists of the cavernous bodies, (cor«
cavernosa) and of the spongy body (eorpus



THE SOLENT FRIEND. 41

4Bpongiosum) the latter terminating in the gland or
glans. These are enveloped in a loose folding of com-
mon integuments.

The cavernous bodies conamence by two bodies called
the crura, one on each side of the ischia ; they unite
•l)elow and in front of the arch of the pubis, and con-*
atitnte the upper part of the peiiis, in the upper groove
there being a large vein, two arteries, nerves, and
iibsorbents, and in the lower, the spongy body surround^'
ing the urethra.

The corpus spen^osum begins at the bulb in the
i^Trot of an oblodsig sweUing of a p3nriform shape. It
is incurvated forward, gradually becoming narrower,
*«!lt3 it reaches the groove on the under part of the
ciBhr^nHtous bodies ; it then becomes cylindrical in shape,
^ntS it assumes a oonioal foreb. when terminating in the
^gljHis peniB. Aocording to dofttie anatomists it consists
fiimpiy of a congeries of veins freely communicating
wth each other, while in the opinion of others
-it consists of cells formed and divided by a trellis work
Aom each other, similar in structure to the cavelmous
bodies, but on a less scale and more regular.

The eenvex conical surface of the gland is covered
by a fine memlwrane, in colour resembling the red part
Tjf ihe lips. At its base or corona there are rows of
projecting papillae which secrete a sebaceoU matter
bffnng a peculiar smell. The gland, which possesses
exquisite sensibility, is protected by the loose covering
called the prepuce or foreskin, which is tied to the penis
immediately below the orifice of the urethra, by the
band called the frsenum : this limits the motion of the
prepuce and tends to keep it in its proper place.

The spongy substance of the urethra, which forms the
plana peniSf is covered Externally with an exceeding thin
membrane or cuticle, under which are placed the very
sensible nervous papillae, which are the chief seat and
cause of pleasure and pain in this part. We may now
understand why many, in the venereal act, have not the
glans distended, though the whole penis is, at the same
time, turgid ; because the plans belong eiltirely to the
•cavernous body of the urethra ; and if tiiat bod^ be
paralytic or weakened fifofti oivj ^tfe^Sfcftcssv% ^t ^f^sS^iJSv^



42 THE SILENT FRIEND.

cause, which we have known often to proceed from
irregular practices ; in all those people where the
spongy body of the urethra is not distended, impotence
will arise, which if not perfectly understood, cannot be
cured by any physician.

Whereas, in healthy men, when these organs are in
due tone, during the orgasmus veneris^ or the moment
before the semen is ejected, the glans and whole caver-
nous body of the urethra are extremely turgid, so as to
be ready to burst ; but soon after a kind of convulsive
motion follows, and the semen is discharged with a
slight loss of strength for a little time throughout the
whole body, which soon recovers its usual vigour.

During coition the corpus spongiosum and glans penis
are rendered turgid by the blood filling their vascular
structure, and the whole canal of the urethra is
lengthened, but made more narrow and straight. The
seed is gradually deposited in the sinus of the bulb ;
the glans being placed at the other extremity of the
corpus spongiosum, and endowed with a peculiar sensi-
bility, when a suf&cient quantity of semen is collected,
excites the muscles covering the bulb to action, and
the contraction of the fibres taking place, the semen
is propelled rapidly along the canal ; ^e blood in the
bulb is at the same time pressed forwards, but requir-
ing a greater impulse, it forms an undulatory wave
behind the semen, narrowing the urethra, and urging
on the semen with increased force.

The corpora cavernosa are covered by a white elastic
ligament of some thickness, and not very vascular,
and are separated by a perforated septum, which allows
the blood contained in the cellular structure to pass
readily through its openings from one to another. They
consist of numerous cells of very irregular size and
shape, bounded by a net-like membranous substance
which allows of as ready a communication between
the cavities as does the septum. The cells of the
corpora cavernosa have been thought to be more or
less muscular, and it is said that in the horse they
are evidently so. These bodies are supplied with blood
by branches from the pudic, which sub-divides into
saudl vessels, and axe distributed everywhere through-
out their structure.



TUX SILENT FRIEND. 43

' When the passion of desire does not exist, the
blood is not poured out into the cells, but returns by
the veins as usual, and the penis remains flaccid ; but
when a person is under the influence of particular
impressions which excite the nerves of these parts, the
minute arterial branches which before had their orifices
closed, have their action suddenly increased, and
pour from their open mouths the blood into these cells,
so as to distend them, of course overcoming the elastic
power that imder ordinary circumstances keeps them
collapsed. In this way the penis is rendered fit to
convey the semen to the female organs of generation.
The erection of the penis is greatly aided by the
action of certain muscles called the erectors of the
penis.

The great vein of the penis is formed by branchei
from the gland, sides of the corpus spongiosum, and
common integuments, runs along the back of the penis
in the upper groove to its root, where it divides into
two vessels which pass under the arch of the pubes,
receive other veins from the prostate and bladder, and
empty themselves into the internal iliac. The ab-
sorbents of the penis are very numerous, and terminate
in the glands of the groin. The nerves are derived
from the lumbar and sacral nerves, and from the
inferior mesenteric plexus.

This chapter will be most appropriately terminated
by some observations on puberty, and the changes it
effects in the system.

The approach of puberty induces marked changes
in the general system of man, as well as in the local
organs which are subservient to generation. The
growth of hair on the chin, upper lip, and sides of
the face, and on the pubes, the peculiar alteration of
the voice, the greater firmness of muscle, the extraor-
dinary change in the passions and feelings, together
with the great increase in the size of the penis and
testicles, shew the advent of a peculiar change in
the system, by which it is adapted for the propagation
.of the species. The desire for connexion with- the
£»txuile, implanted in man by natvxxe lot ^^wSsfc^^a^^«&^



44 THE SILENT FRIEND.

becomes developed after the period of puberty, and
the organs by which the act is performed, gradually
assume their full vigor and dimensions.

The age at which the peculiar changes in the or-
ganism called puberty takes place varies in different
climates and in different constitutions. It is also in-
fluenced by the mode of life and circumstances of the
individual. The period of puberty occurs earlier in
warm tlian in cold climates ; in temperate countries,
it takes place from the fourteenth to the seventeenth
year ; the passions of youths living in large cities and
towns are however excited earlier than are those of
the agricultural population, on account of the greater
sources of temptation to which they are exposed.

In those animals which are not endowed with reason
to guide their actions, the desire for copulation occurs
periodically, and in some the testicles increase in size
imtil the season of procreation is over, and then de-
crease, and continue small, until the commencement
of the next season. Evidence of this may be readily
found in the testicles of the cock- sparrow, which pro-
gressively increase in size from January till the end of
April, when the love season of these birds usually
terminates. The increase and diminution of these or-
gans however do not take place in birds only, but ha3
been discovered in many other animals, more es-
pecially in the land -mouse and mole.

There are several reasons which might be alleged
for the existence of a periodical desire for copulation
among animals — were it otherwise, as the passion for
sexual intercourse is very powerful, and animals do
not possess the light of reason so as to be enabled
to restrain or subdue their passions, it is probable that
from its excessive indulgence, all their other habits might
be lost, and even the necessity of providing for their
present and future wants might be forgotten ; besides
which in those animals which are very fruitful, and which
do not long carry their young, their number would
be in a short time exceedingly great, far beyond the
means of support that nature has provided for them.
Another reason might be alleged, that were domestic
Moimais dtwaja in heai, they would be of comparatively



THB SILEKT FRIEND. 45

Mttle service to man, while the flesh of wild ones would
be too coarse and rank, and altogether unfit for the
purposes of nourishment.

The period of the year during which the desire for
copulation principally exists in animals is that of spring
— ^few experience any sexual desire during the winter,
except the frog, woLf, and fox ; the severity of the
cold seems to destroy, at least for the time, all such
feelings. On the other hand, in climates where the
summer is very hot, the genital organs of animals then
become so much relaxed in tone, as to render them
unfit for the proper performance of the necessary act.

The case is however somewhat different in domestic
animals ; the passion is less periodical, the secretion of
semen not being arrested by cold, to which they are
much less exposed, and the circumstances in which
they are placed being altogether different.

In man the desire for procreation arises at puberty,
and may and can be indulged in, if health and the
requisite powers continue, at all times and seasons
of the year. Being endowed by nature with the high,
the exidted function of reason, he is left a free agent,
having the full power to use or abuse his capabilities,
with the consciousness that if he do abuse the functions
with which he is gifted, he must abide the penalty.
Man is not affected by changes of temperature as are
the wild animals, either as respects excessive heat or
intense cold, and consequently the human testicles are
generally the same in dimensions after puberty through-
out the year.

The desire for sexual intercourse in man begins
after puberty, and is consentaneous with the secretion
of semen or seed by the testicles. It is preposterous
to say it depends on the occurrence of that secretion,
as both the passion for copulation and the secretion
of semen are but indications of the great change which
takes place in the system at that epoch. It does not
however exist before the testicles begin to enlarge in
size, and perform their proper Amction, and it is said,
but untruly, to be lost when the operation of castra-
tion has been performed. Those eunuchs only are not
influenced bj ihe desire for 'pxocte^^tcscL'^V^'^^T^ ^*



46 THE SILENT FRIEND*

prived of the organs of generation prior to puberty ;
those who were castrated subsequent to that event,
still entertain the desire for intercourse, although in a
less degree than men who have all their organs entire.
Desire is more languid in advanced age than during
the period of the adult life ; the seed is then more
sparingly secreted, and indeed all the functions of the
system are performed in a less energetic manner, al-
though, as will soon be shown, old men are not in every
instance deprived of the power of generation. Desire
is also very moderate in persons who have small organs,
and occasionally it is altogether absent. Spermatozoa
have been discovered in the testicles of men upwards
of seventy years of age, and on one occasion in the
organs of a tailor, who died as the age of eighty-seven.
There are even circumstances on record of persons
retaining the procreative faculty to the age of one
hundred years ; but in these cases, as in the well-known
instance of old Parr, the general bodily powers were
also preserved in an extraordinary degree.

In speaking of this function, and of its exercise, Dr.
Carpenter in his Principles of Human Physiology ob-
serves, — * To the use of the sexual organs for the con-
tinuance of his race, man is prompted by a powerful
instinctive desire, which he shares with the lower ani-
mals. This instinct is excited by sensations ; and
these may either originate in the sexual organs them-
selves, or may be excited through the organs of special
sensation. Thus in man it is most powerfully aroused
by impressions conveyed through the sight or touch i
in many other animals the auditory and olfactory organs
communicate impressions which have an equal power ;
and it is not improbable that in certain morbidly ex-
cited states of feeling, the same may be the case in
ourselves. That local impressions have also very
powerful effect in exciting sexual desire must have
been within the experience of almost every one ; the
fact is most remarkable however in cases of satyriasis.
This disease is generally found to be connected with
some obvious cause of irritation of the generative sys-
tem, such as pruritus, active congestion, etc. The
Instinct (for jezual intercourse) when once aroused^



THE SILENT FRIEND. 47

(even though very obscurely felt,) acts upon the men-
tal faculties and moral feelings, and thus becomes the
source, though almost unconsciously so to the individual,
of the tendency to form that kind of attachment to-
wards one of the opposite sex, which is known as love.
This tendency cannot be regarded as a simple passion
or emotion, since it is the result of the combined op-
erations of the reason, the imagination, and the moral
feelings ; and it is in the engraftment (so to speak)
of the psychical attachment upon mere corporeal in-
stinct that a diiFerence exists between the sexual re-
lations of man and those of the lower animals.'



48 THE SILENT fRIENI>.

EXPLANATION OF THE PLATES.



FRONTISPIECE— a front view of the contents of the
abdomen and pelvis, and of the organs of generation.

A A, the kidneys

B B, the renal capsules,

c c c c, the renal arteries and veins.

D, the great artery or aorta.

X, the great cava vein,

F, the spermatic artery,

G 6, the spermeUic veins,

HH-,the ureters*

1 1, the spermatic cords,

K, tJie rectum.

L, the bladder.

M , the penis.

Hff the gland of the penis.

o, the orifice of the penis,

T, the testicle.

Q,, the vas deferens.

B, the scrotum.



PLATE 1st

This plate offers a general side view of the pelvis, and of
its contents.

A, is the bladder, in a state of distennon^ with its blood vessels
ramifying on it.

B, the ureter t arising from the pelvis of the kidney, ana pas-
sing downwards and slightly inwards to the bladder, which it enters
at the lower and back part, ajter crossing over the vas deferens,

c, the seminal vesicle.

D, the prostate, embracing the neck of the bladder, and surround-
ing the prostatic part of the urethra.

c, the rectum, or lower bowel, situated immediately behind the
bladder, from which it is separated by loose cellular tissue, and a
partial Jold of the peritoneum.

T, the penis, represented in a state of partial erection, with an
instrument passed, in order the better to display

Q, the urethra, which, continuous with, and arising from the neck
tf the bladder, passes out of the pelvis under the arch of the pubes,
and runs along the under groove in the penis, terminating at the
giant.

H, the spermatic cord passing out of the scrotum, through the a5-
dominal rings and inguinal canal (which are not represented in the
plate, the walls of the abdomen having been removed, the better to
display the situation of its contents) and then along the side of the
bladder, until the cord becomes separated, the arteries, veins, and
nerves taking one course, while the vas deferens i, plunges into the
jf^hns, Urminating in the common duct, which it forms by uniting
«h6| Oe^ seminal vesicles.



.«- »•♦




Cf Jirrr/:' fi.h



"om \.me ifirHtnmt^'thr J'l-ti









-rf 1



; ' u ".



• ".'rt .... ;/ip ;«i . ^



I ■ / ».



THE SILENT fSIEND. 49



PLATE 2nd.— Figure Ist.

A, the spermatic cord, consisting of the artery, veins^ and nerves,

B, the testicle, representing also the origin of the deferent tube
from the epididymis.

c, the deferent tube, talcing its course to join the seminai vesicle,

D, the seminal vesicle,

E, the bladder.

F, the ureter.



PLATE 2nd.— Figure 2nd.

A, the deferent tube, magnified,

B, the same tube, laid open,

c, the seminal vesicle, shewing its cellular arrangement.
D, tfie same laid open.



PLATE 3rd.— Figure Ist.

A A, ^ vasa deferentia, conveying the semen from the tesHcle
to the urethra,

B B, the seminal vesicles, representing their convoluted appear'
once.

c c, the arteries supplying these parts with blood.

D, openings of the vasa deferentia in the prostatic portion of the
urethra,

-£,"£,, the lateral tubes of the prostate,

F F, the prostatic portion of the urethra laid open, shewing the
caput gaUinaginis, or verumontanum.



Figure 2nd.

A, the bladder.

B, the neck or cervix of the bladder.
c c, the ureters.

D D, the vasa deferentia.
c E, the seminal vesicles.
T, the anterior portion of the prostate.
G, tlte membranous portion of the urethra.
H, the erector muscles of the penis.
1 1, the cavernous bodies of the penis.
K K, the arteries of the penis,

L, the great vein, with the arteries and nerves running in the
upper groove of the penis,
M M, nerve of the penis.
N, orifice of the urethra.
O, gland of the penit.
p, the prepuee or foreskin,.



50 THE SILENT FRIEND.



ONANISM AND ITS CONSEQUENCES.



The practice of the solitary vice, onanism, manustu-
pration or mast|^bation has been condemned by all
writers, whether medical men, philosophers, or divines,
from the earliest ages of mankind. One of its names,
onanism, is derived from the saddening example of
Onan the second son of Judah, who was struck dead
by his Creator for the commission of this heinous sin.
In other places in Scripture, allusions are made to this
dangerous practice, and fearful denunciations are an-
nounced against those who are guilty — denunciations
which are fully carried out in the wretchedness of health
both of body and mind, which follow its commission.
Man cannot err against the dictates of nature, without
pajdng a severe penalty for his lapse sooner or later.
The penalty exacted for onanism is one of the most
serious and awful nature. It involves a gradual ex-
haustion of the powers of mind and body, and an early
death, attended with every suiFering that man can
endure. Every function of the system becomes disor-
dered and diseased ; and at last the wretched victim of
error perishes in a state of misery too fearful to con-
template.

The exhaustion of the system, caused by excessive
evacuations of any kind, is constantly shewn by the
results of many of the diseases to which flesh is heir.
Of all these there is not one which exerts so maliflcent
an influence on the frame, as excessive discharge of the
seminal fluid, whether it be poured forth in a healthy
condition, or whether it be diseased, thin and watery,
in consequence of the habitual practice of one of the
most dangerous habits man can acquire. Sexual in-
tercourse if carried to excess, is markedly injurious ;
daify- experience is confirmatory of the assertion, but



THE SILIITT FRIEND. 51

the injury resulting from self-pollution so far exceeds it
in magnitude, as scarcely to admit of a comparison be-
tween their respective consequences. It is therefore
still more to be dreaded in its final action than sexual
intercourse.

This fact admits of ready explanation. Sexual in-
tercourse, even when carried to such an extent as to be
absolutely immoderate, cannot however be pursued with-
out occasional periods of cessation, — ^lasting for a lapse
of time far beyond that which occurs in the manipula-
tions of the masturbator. Repeated connexion with
women cannot be carried out so frequently, as the man
guilty of self-pollution can pursue his degrading and
destructive practices, nor is it attended when it does
take place, with the same amount of sexual and general
excitement. The nervous energy is consequently less
depressed, and the powers of life rally sooner. If then
we take in account these several facts, that sexual inter-
course is not repeated so frequently, nor so soon after
the previous act, that it is not attended with the same
amount of general excitement and consequently the
nervous system is more rapidly restored, and less per-
manently injured, than by the act of onanicm, the
difference in their respective influences on the system
will be readily understood and generally admitted.

From a knowledge of these facts, it appears evident,
that those individuals who suffer themselves; to be
governed by passion rather than by reason, and whose
vivid imagination leads them to the indulgence of sen-
sual habits earlier than Nature intended, anticipate the
ability of manhood ere its empire is established ; thus
demolishing the delicate groundwork of physical energy,
and soliciting a manhood of disgraceful imbecility. Tlus
maniacal act of delusion not only deprives the system
of its salutary and essential support, but abo obstructs
the power of seminal excitement ; and, by stimulating
the organs to transient vigour, brings, ere middle life
succeeds the summer of manhood, all the senrihle infir-
mities and foibles of age ; producing in its impetuous
current, such an assemblage of morbid irritation, that
even on trivial occasions its excitement is of a high and
inflammable character, axid it3 e\iOxa«:wi.^ \i«^^\)^ •^fea^



52 THE SILENT FRIEND.

power of reason to sustain : and when at last tlie lucid
interval breaks through the dark clouds, what is the
retrospect ? what lights upon the mind's eye ? — all that
is opposed to every honourable and honest feeling ! be-
cause the more that reflection is concentrated on this
surreptitious act, the more derogatory to every thing
manly does this singular and extraordinary deviation
from the dictates of nature appear.

By the repeated excitement of the nervous system,
produced by the practice of this unnatural and self-des-
troying passion, the constitution is left in a deplorable
state of health, and that neivous condition kept up,
which places the individual in a state of anxiety and
misery for the remainder of his existence, — a kind of
contingency, which it is difficult for language adequately
to describe ; he vegetates, but lives not : hence the con-
sequences arising out of the ashes of this dangerous
phoenix are not confined to its pure physical result, but
extend to moral ones, leading the excited deviating
mind into a fertile field of seductive error — into a gra-
dual and fatal degradation of manhood — into a perni-
cious, disgraceful, and ultimately almost involuntary
application of those inherent rights which nature wisely
instituted for the preservation of her species. When
once the destructive practice is established, the barrier
of intellectual control falls ; for the mind, that changling
of social cultivated man, by a singular adjunction, be-
comes not the corrector, but the exciter and co-operator
in defiance of culture, moral feeling, moral obligation,
and religious impressions : thus the man, who, at the
advent of youth and genius was endowed with gaiety
and sociality, becomes, ere twenty-five summers have
shed their lustre on him, a misanthrope, and a nadir-
point of discontent ! What moral region does that man
live in ? what moral feeling does he cherish, that would
not unite all the energies of his nature to stem the tor-
rent of so fatal a cataract ? Is it nothing to give license
and tacit approbation to a weakness and predilection
that break through all the barriers of nature, and give
to the individual a callous insensibility, foreign to the
native texture of his heart, and darkens all the brilliant
Mid entbusiastic prospects of the future ? Is it nothing



THE SILENT FRIENP. 53

to surrender up all the refined and manly enjoTments
of social and conjugal intercourse, and substitute in
their places a deep and barren misery ? Is it nothing
to light the gloomy torch that guides, by slow and
melancholy steps to the sepulchre of manhood, in the
gay and fascinating spring-time of youth and ardent
desire ; when the brilliant fire of passion, genius, and
sentiment, ought to electrify the whole frame ? Is it
nothing to raise a host of sensations, of the most de-
pressing nature, all hostile to the natural ardency of
youthful passions ?

To begin the career of manhood by the abuse of
Nature's fimctions, and that too, when the system has
not completed the powers of its organization, and
abounds with energy and passion, is contrary to all the
rules by which health and happiness may be attained ;
exclusively absorbed by this fatal passion, all the powers
of mind and body are wasted in illusion, and an age
of care and anxiety follows, ere the full period of man-
hood has been reached ; as it keeps the individual in a
state of perpetual effervescence, it becomes the worst
of all delusions ; and, under the varied forms of its
peculiar excitement, it produces morbid sensibility,
erotic imagination, and their consequent results — hypo-
chondriasm, hysteria, indigestion, &c. — ^which, on their
first approach, are considered of too light a character
to merit attention : and thus time passes on till the
whole system is involved in relative or positive disease.
That the dangerous consequences of those delusive acts
are not early felt, does not prove they never will in the
lapse of time : and if, in some iron constitutions, it does
not produce any physical consequences, it still leaves
upon the mind a painful impression, and causes doubt,
anxiety, and a marked dissatisfaction with the conditions
upon which the tenure of life is held : in fact, it has no
counterbalancing advantage, no redeeming quality; it
is equally injurious to physical and moral purity ; and
however modified by strength of constitution or of mind,
ought not to be regarded with any thing approaching to
indifference ; it is a state too dangerous, indeed, to be re-
garded with indifference ; and we hesitate not to say,
that,, in its mischieyous progress^ it.\&^iSDL<&\tKt^^sa&^?t^x:5



'. "i.



-, J



I



».



.•••i:.i^ Vf\



54 THE SILENT FRIEND.

baneful vice : and when the individual, overwhelmed
with disgrace, contempt, and odium, can no longer sus-
tain the excitement, the mind, revolting against an
existence that assimilates to it nothing but unhappy
aberrations, seeks peace from its errors in suicide : it
gradually diminishes the sensibility of the organs ; and
generally produces emaciation, which ends either in tabes
or atrophy, for sooner or later, it weakens the power of
digestion : and the bile, the gastric and pancreatic juices,
all become vitiated. In some habits a few weeks' in-
dulgence in this infatuated propensity will induce these
diseases, either by sympathy or connection ; and where
a predisposition to insanity exists, derangement follows.
It not only occasions impotency, by producing a paralysis
of the muscles concerned in sexual energy, but it des-
troys the excitement itself by which the act is induced,
and the feelings which lead to it are maintained.

This crime constitutes in itself an abandonment of
the essential position that man should occupy in society.
Look at it indeed under any aspect in which it can be
regarded, and the plainest facts demonstrate its pernici-
ous tendency. Appeal to nature ; ask her the character
of this horrid act; and in the pure, calm, reflecting
language of simplicity and truth, she will reply, that
the deed is only in unison with every thing that is inju-
rious to physical, intellectual, and moral influences;
draining the constitution of its vigour and vitality, and
destro3dng every manly and virtuous feeling ! It is a
vampire feeding on the life-blood of its victims : it
renders them for ever ambiguous beings, in the scale of
manhood : they present the complication of apparent
energy vnthout the corresponding re- action of animal
vitality.

By this practice a constant irritation is kept up in
the system, which by its perpetual influence, renders
the delicate flbres of those organs incapable of the act
of coition : for, by its repetition, the organs of gener-
ation are so familiarized vdth the dictates of the imagi-
nation, that they are more readily excited into action,
and that too imperfectly, by this morbid and vitiated
influence, than by the efiects of their natural stimuli ;
itjDJoduceB that debility which must ever result from



THE SILENT FRIEKD. 55

excessive action of any organ, and that general ex-
haustion of the nervous system which is the morbid
consequence of power unnaturally exerted beyond its
limits. Thus the foundation of an aversion to Paphian
pleasures is laid, and nocturnal emissions soon follow.
Some slight local irritation of the parts agitates the first
link of that cham of ideas which has been artificially
associated with the action of these organs ; uninter-
rupted by external impressions, the chain continues ;
and the organs perform their :^ctions in compliance
with this excitement, and that too frequently, at all hours
of the day and night, and apparently from the most
trivial cause. These repetitions are more than the
human frame can bear, and they produce that incapacity
for erection in the male, which lays the foundation of
impotence, and which causes in the female an aversion
to sexual intercourse. The mind, by becoming interested
in the performance of this act, and by the exhaustion
of the nervous energy which its frequent performance
induces, becomes debilitated ; silently tortured by the
bitterest agonies of remorse, the wretched victim of this
foul propensity suffers from a general lassitude of the
nervous action, in which the whole system participates,
but more particularly the organs of digestion ; for such
is the sympathy of these parts with the act of impression,
that all the physical and moral sensibilities are directed
to them, as to one common focus. A stronger illustra-
tion of this fact cannot be met with than in Dr. Darwin's
Zoonomia, whei^, treating of that hallucination of mind
produced by the pred(»ninance of one particular impres-
sion, he mentions the circumstance of a man who shot
himself, leaving upon the table a slip of paper containing
these words oi3y, * / am impotent, and not fit to live J

Returning to the immediate object of our investiga-
tion, let us enquire, in the first place, if there be no
moral turpitude attached to an act that counteracts the
end for which we were designed? secondly, has the
constant repetition of this act no efiect on the animal
mechanism? thirdly, will not the seminal vessels, by
being emptied too frequently and too rapidly ,be filled
with greater abundance of fiuid, but of a less healthy
and natural character? AgreesKA^ \a ^<&\k<4i% cSL*^



56 TBfi SILENT FRIEND.

animal economy, as this elaborate secretion is increased
in quantity, all the other secretions must be impoyer-
ished ; this effect therefore does not confine its operation
to muscular energy alone, but causes its influence to
be felt also by the intellectual powers. Galen says, that
" every pore is full of semen with those who refrain
from sexual intercourse ; that it has excellent virtues,
and very speedily communicates some of its power and
energy to all parts of the body." " Nature,** says an
edegant writer, " has given us hunger for the preser-
vation of the individual, and lust for the support of the
species : " reasonable creatures correct their incentives,
and make them conducive to the purposes of friendship
and society, by placing them in subj^tion to moral sen-
timent and the influences of the intellect. In fact, this
practice not only injures the body, but the mind also
and that at a period when it is full of genius and
power : even when the passions are developing them-
selves in the zenith and energy of their action, its in-
fluence is felt throughout the whole fabric, acting with
fearful energy on the mental faculties, and rendering
the individual unqualified for the ordinary and neces-
sary avocations of social life : reducing him to a state
of childish imbecility and premature decrepitude, and
bringing on all the habitudes of premature age, ere the
middle of life has arrived: he carries with him the
form and aspect of other men, but without the vigour
and energy of that season which his early youth bade
him hope to attain. Buffon observes : " How many
men cease to be men, or, at least, cease to enjoy man-
hood, at thirty ? How many at eighteen receive the
impression of the seeds of a disgraceful disease itself,
which it is impossible afterwards to eradicate ? For an
abuse of the sexual impulse greatly accelerates old age :
and unfortunately, as the season of life advances, to
its imbecility are added all the errors that approximate
to youthful sensuality; thus the desire of venery is
either transient and insufficient, or totally annihilated,
producing a debility little short of death. In the gen-
erative system, it forces and weakens the vessels of
these organs to such a baneful extent, that when the
luxuriance o/jouthfuj passions prompts to the lively



THE SILENT FRIEND. 57

intercourse of sexual bliss, they feel, they bum, with
all the ardour of endearing blandishments, yet want the
energy and capabilities necessary for their gratification.
^ To condemn and expose a sin so displeasing to God
— so detrimental to mankind — and so injurious to
ourselves, requires no other way of arguing than that
which is agreeable to the plainest truth, and can stand
the test of the severest reason ; for there is not a place
either in the Old or New Testament, where the
lust of the flesh, or the abomination of Sodom are
condemned, but this sin is mentioned amongst others,
and there is little doubt but those who are guilty of
it are comprehended among the abominable.

But if it had not been revealed to us that God is
highly offended at all manner of uncleanliness, when
we reflect on the end of marriage, in all countries and
in all societies, and the manner after which God has
ordained our species should be continued, natural
religion and our own reason would of themselves
instruct us, that to destroy that end must be very
oflensive to God ; and we cannot refrain from quoting
the words of a learned divine, while speaking of this
shameM and disgusting practice, ** The crime in
itself,^* says he, ''fi monstrous and unnatural — in its
practice fMhy and odious to extremity — its guilt is
crying and its consequences ruinous — it destroys con-
jugal affection — -prevents naturul inclination — and tends
to extinguish the hopes of posterity,^*

We shall not here meddle with the causes of un-
cleanliness in general, as these are sufficiently treated
of in most books of devotion and practical divinity, so
We refer our readers to them, and design only to speak
of those peculiar causes which belong to this sin, and
hardly any other. The first cause is ignorance of the
enormity of the crime. — There are thousands among
the youths of both sexes, ingCRious, docile, diligent,
and tractable, who, either by the example of their
intimates, through their own wantonness, or by being
idle and alone, and some again by mere accident, have
learned to pollute themselves after this manner, who
would have abhorred the thought had they under-
bUxA the nature of the sin, and \>ee;ix «jciQ^aj^co^^^^2^



58 THE SILEKT FRIEND.

the heinousness of the crime. The second is the
SECRECY with which self-pollution may he committed ;
aU other actions of uncleanliness must have a witness —
this needs none. The third and last cause we shall
allege is impurity; though the laws against adultery
are in many places very remiss or ill executed, yet
the dread of them keeps the fearful in awe. The
punishment for unnatural impurities committed with
others is capital, whereas, in self-pollution neither the
CAUTIOUS or the covetous imagine they have anything
to fear. What a strange thing it is, therefore, that a
man should show bashfhliiess and the utmost coward-
ice to his feUow creature, (even should that fellow
creature be the most impotent wretch,) and that he
should behave with gigantic boldness and impudence
to the Almighty Creator of heaven and earth. What
comfort must a man have in reflecting on the past
actions of his life, who hardly coming to half the age
he might reasonably have expected to have arrived
at, finds himself enervated by the practice of self-pol-*
lution, his spirits sunk, his body wasted, and his
strength decayed, and in continual danger of being
forced to resign his impure breath upon the least
inclemency of the season, or any other trifling accident ?
Many individuals scarcely turned of forty years of
age, and sometimes even earlier, who have lived rather
fireely, are not unfrequently about that period of life,
greatly changed in their powers of sexual intercourse.
They may, indeed, in general hesdth and personal ap-
pearance, be stout, and, for several years, not very
sensible of the degeneration of their powers, but the
frequency of their inclination fear such duties gradually
becomes much diminished, and that is a symptom which
is at all times indicative of approaching iinpotence;
for the inclination gradually and entirely ceasing, the
power speedily follows, or rather both are lost together.
In others, about the same time of life, the j^ysical
power ceases first, and the ixKslination continuing, often
for many years after, they are obliged to gratify them-
selves in amusements which are the mere pantomine of
amorous indulgences! — such individuals, being other-
wise In tolerable health, are recoverable.



THE SILENT FRIEND. 59

From actual observation, we are convinced, that all
these different states owe their origin, and even their
immediate ei^stence to nearly the same cause, and may,
in almost every instance, be removed by nearly similar
treatment.

Hippocrates, the most ancient and just observer,
has idready described the ills that are occasioned by
self-abuse, under the title of Tabes dorsalis : "This
disorder arises from the spinal marrow ; and those of
a lascivious disposition are ajBdicted with it. They
have no fever, and though they eat well they fall away
and become consumptive. They feel as if a string or
stitch descended from the head along the spinal mar-
row. Every time they go to stool, or have occasion
to urine, they shed a great quantity of thin seminal
liquor. They are incapable of procreation, and thejr
frequently dream of the act of coition. Walking, par-
ticidarly in rugged paths, puts them out of breath and
weakens them; occasioning a heaviness in the head
and noise in the ears, which are succeeded by a violent
fever, (l3rpiria,) that terminates their days." In a further
description of the disease, he also observes " that it is
caused by a wasting of the marrow of the back-bone in
an unnatural way ; " by which doubtlessly he meant the
sperm, or seminal liquor. "The patient," says he, "is
free from fever, yet feels a kind of burning heat on
some^intemal part : sometimes eats and digests well ;
and if you ask him with respect to his state, he tells
you that he feels a cold running stream from the supe-
rior part of his body (the head we suppose) into the
spine of his back, and when he discharges his urine or
his excrement, there Is sometimes an evacuation of
liquid semeur" "This man," continues the sage
philosopher of Cos,^ "will be rendered incapable of
propagating his species, or answering the purposes of
the marriage bed,, unless the healing art affords him
reHef."

" He is generally short-breathed, feels languid after
rising in the morning, with weakness about his loins,
and especially after much exercise, and his sleep does
not afford him the wished-for refreshment. An inter-
mitdi^ dimness of sight someXitck^^ ^XXaJ;^^^2^)S£k.^^^
memory fedlSf and his spirits \>ecoTQft ^e^^^Xfc^-''



60 THE SILENT FRIEND.

Hippocrates then farther observes, " that when this
distemper continues for a length of time, it assumes
various appearances in the constitution, and makes
other stages under different characters ; if not rightly
understood it may end in an atrophy, or nervous con-
sumption ; or, perhaps, in phthisis^ or consumption of
the lungs, where the healing art, but too often, proves
in vain.'*

There can be nothing more dreadful than the pic-
ture whieh Aetius has left us- of the ills that are pro-
duced by too great a discharge of the semen. *' Young
people," says he, '^have the air and appearance of old
age; they become pale, effeminate, benmnbed, lazy,
base, stupid, and even imbecile ; their bodies become
bent, their legs are no longer able to carry them ; they
have an utter distaste for everything, are totally incapa-
citated, and may become paralytic." '^ The stomach
is disordered," says Aetius, ** all the body is weakened ;
paleness, bodily decay,- and emaciation succeed, and the
eyes sink into the head." These testimonies of the
most respectable ancients are confirmed by innumer-
able modem writers. Sanctorius, who has examined
with the greatest attention all the causes which in-
fluence the human body, has observed that it weakens
the stomach, destroys digestion, obstructs that insen-
sible perspiration, the irregularity of which produces
the most fatal consequences, occasions the liver and
kidneys to be overheated, causes a deposition of the
stone in the latter, diminishes the natural heat» and
usually occasions the loss of, or at least weakens, the
sight. Lommius, in his beautiful commentaries upon
the passages of Celsus, supports the testimony of the
author, with his own just observations. "Frequent
emissions of the seed relax, dry up, weaken, enervate,
and produce a crowd of evils ; apoplexies, lethargies,
epilepsies, faintings, the loss of sight, tremors, palsy,
spasms, and every species of the most racking gout."

The description which Tulpius, that celebrated phy-
sician of Amsterdam, has left us cannot be read with-
out horror. " The spinal marrow does not only waste,
];>ut the body and mind both equally languish, and the
man perishes a miserable victim." "Nothing," says



THE SILENT FRIEND. 61

that renownea physician, De Louvain, ''weakens the
stomach and abridges life so soon." Blanchard has
been an eye-witness to a simple gonorrhoea, to con-
sumptions, and dropsies which have flowed from this
source.

When tabes dorsalis has existed for a length of time
in the constitution, the frequent and involuntary dis-
charges of the semen, from ideas arising in the mind
during sleep, or by unnatural practice, the aeininal
yesicles become so relaxed and weakenedL that they
hare not sufficient power to retain it. By its ffiort
continuance in the seminal yesicles, it has not time to
become elaborated, nor to communicate. Uiat balsamic,
sedative, and strengthening quality to the nerves of the
human frame, which by nature it was intended to do.
Almost as fast as it is secreted from the blood, the
slightest stimulus in the mind, from external objects,
causes it to run off by its own reservoirs into the
urethra ; and in course of time the natural secretion of
the gland through which the semen passes becomes
* vitiated, till at last these organs become merely a com-
mon cistern or sink to carry off involuntarily the most
precious humour of the human body. The secretion
of the prostate gland in this disease, will scnnetimes
run off, as well as the semen, with the url])|ey and
sometimes when straining at stool ; and it requites con-
siderable experience to distinguish the one from the
other. In particular stages of this disease, experience
has taught us that the nervous system of some patients
will become affected in a peculiar manner, according to
the variety of constitutions and temperaments; be-
sidesy many foreign circumstances occasion a consider-
able difference in the manner in which the nervous
systems of different individuals are attacked in conse-
quence of this malady.

Many instances are not wanting, where an atrophy
or nervous consiunption has succeeded, and also phthisis
or consumption of the lungs, which puts a period to
life.

By way of distinction from other consumptions, this
disease is termed tabes dorsalis, because the seat o€ t]bi&
disease at its commencemeuLt \s ^eTk<&x^^ ^^^x^v^^^ \^



62 THE SILENT FRIEND.

affect the patient about the loins, and the small of his
back, the seminal fiinctions being the chief seat of the
disorder. In the beginning of this disease the body
is sometimes costive, with symptoms of heat in some
parts, whilst others are cold, and a lowness of spirits
with melancholy generally attend ; but whether these
are real s3maptoms or not, must be ascertained by
the experienced practitioner. When it is taken early,
and rightly understood, it is not dangerous ; but when
it has existed for a length of time, the constitution will
decay, and, as we have frequently observed, it is attended
with peculiar circumstances, which differ from other
consumptions ; for, when the patient has discovered the
cause of his malady, he despairs of a cure, while if
rightly managed and properly understood it is impossi-
ble he should miscarry.

If the cause of the patient's sufferings has not been
removed, the decay of the constitution makes a farther
progress, and spreads far and wide. We know, from
experience, that when any corrupted humour becomes ,
absorbed into the general circulation of the fluids, the
blood and nervous aura will be more or less vitiated
and impaired. A pain, with weakness, sometimes
seizes the small of the back, and now and then a
troublesome sensation seems to descend, by the back-
bone, upon the loins; the patient by degrees will
sometimes grow chilly, and any air colder than ordinary
pierces the spine. After the patient has suffered thus
for some time, a languor seizes on the spirits; and
this may happen to both sexes, for women are sub-
ject to this disease as well as men. Moving pains of
the head will often take place, and wandering pains
of the legs, arms, and joints, accompanied sometimes
with a weakness of all the senses, whereupon all sen-
sation becomes vitiated ; the eyes suffer from clouds
and mists that seem to fall before the sight and inter-
cept the light ; and the ears sometimes sing and tingle,
as if something were breeding in their hollow cavities.
Upon an involuntary emission of the semen, which will
sometimes be frequent under this decay, the strength
of the patient seems to come away with it ; and there
Aave been instancea of his lying like a log^ unable



THE SILENT FRIENI). 63

scarcely to turn himself; and if tliis discharge of the
semen he very copious, cases hare occurred where the
patient has fainted away. If this disease continue for
any considerable time unrelieved, many instances have
happened in which the patient has been i educed to
desperation, with melancholy reflections, anideties, and
dismal conflicts, so as to require every attention and
care of the practitioner. A variety of other evils might
also be brought forward.

Too great a dissipation of the animal spirits weakens
the stomach, destroys the appetite ; and nutrition having
no longer a place, the motion of the heart is weak-
ened, all the parts languish, and an epilepsy or palpita-
tion of the heart to a most distressing degree succeed.
Hoflman has seen the most fatal accidents' flow from
a dissipation of the seed. ''After frequent nocturnal
pollutions," says he, "not only the powers are lost,
the body falls away, and the face turns pale; but
moreover the memory fails, a cold sensation seizes
the limbs, the sight is clouded, and the voice becomes
hoarse ; all the body languishes by degrees ; and dis-
turbing dreams prevent sleep administering any relief."

An eloquent writer also remarks, that ''all the
intellectual functions participate in this derangement:
the memory loses its retentive power; the ideas are
connected with no solidity : caprice rather than reflec-
tion governs every action, and, in fact, parti^ msanity
invades the whole system ; while inward terror, rest-
lessness, and con8ta;nt anguish, are never absent from
the hapleps suflerer, if this state of systen^ be long al-
lowed, to predominate." Such individuals generally
become hypocondriacal or hy^t^cal, with all the ills
attendaort on these tedious -complaints : some are affected
with coughs, slow fevers, and lingering consumptions :
the most acute pains pervade different parts of the
body; which frequently have been referred to ima-
ginary sensibility, but which sensations, we contend,
are actually present, and produce a change of organi-
zation equally as hostile to the mind as to the constitu-
tion, and which are called into action on the slightest
impression. There are not only to be seen pimples
on the face, which is a commou %yccc^\ncQL^ \s^ ^<^^:\ik



64 THB 8ILEKT FRIEKD.

blotches and carbuncles sometimes appear there, as well
as on the nose, breast and thighs: and occasionally,
fleshy excrescences arise on the forehead. Amid this
mighty ravage of silent disease, the generative organs
are aJso affected: the semen is evacuated on the
slightest irritation, even on going to stool: numbers
are affected with habitual gonorrhoea, which entirely
destroys the energy and vigour of the constitution, the
discharge assuming the appearance of that which flows
from old ulcers in the legs : impotence more or less
exists: the functions of the intestines are sometimes
totally destroyed; and some individuals complain of
costiveness, others of diarrhaea and piles, thus consti-
tuting a class of disease, calamitous indeed, which
perhaps, at its first approach may arise without pro-
ducing any organic alteration, but ultimately assists in
nourishing those changes that become combined with
the affections produced. We are of opinion that they
not only occasion impotence in the one sex, and sterility
in the other, but that they lay the foundation of those
tedious discharges which sometimes assume the cha-
racter of seminal, and at other times of mucal, gleets.

The Arabian physicians, who were the first to prac-
tise the art of healing, have handed down to us, in
their writings, the reasons why a discharge of semen
will weaken the body more than the loss of a large
quantity of blood. There have also been some of the
modems who have calculated how much the body is
weakened by a seminal emission ; but all this seems to
arise from a kind of epilepsy, or convulsion, which ac-
companies the emission, especially in the unnatural way,
and not from the quantity of semen lost, provided the
nerves are in a healthy state ; for, if the individual be
in sound health, his strength returns in a little time,
even before a fresh supply of semen itfelf can be re-
stored, providing thg discharge of the seminal fluid be
effected in the way nature has pointed out, and not in
the manner which these pages are intended to repro-
bate in the strongest terms our language enables us to
adopt.

A learned physician who wrote about thirty years
sinee^ in describing the wretched condition of those



THE SILENT FRIEND* 65

"who have impaired their health and capabilities by
masturbation, observes, " Like every other organ of the
body, the seminal vessels have a certain round of action
to perform, which, if undisturbed, they will continue
to do through a whole course of long life. These ac-
tions will proceed with considerable regularity, even
where sexual intercourse is altogether neglected ; for
the healthy secretion of semen, when it has proceeded
to a certain extent, will naturally be thrown off without
occasioning disease : but, like every other organ of
the body, when subjected to continued extraordinary
exertion, from whatever cause, their action is altered ;
they become diseased, and either cease to secrete
healthy semen, become incapable of retaining it after
it is secreted, or are entirely and irrecoverably rendered
imfit for again resuming their office.

This irrecoverable state, however, is much less com-
mon than was once supposed. The disease is most fre-
quently caused by habits altogether contrary to the
laws of nature, and to habituate ourselves to such
practices, by working up the imagination, and creating
artificial desires, is always injurious ; and the more
delicate the vessels exposed to such practices, the more
likely they are to be seriously injured. This obser-
vation is strictly applicable to the present complaint.
Indeed, from the commencement of the unfortimate
habit of self-pollution, which is the most frequent cause
of this disease, there is seldom any desire for sexual
intercourse ; and although such desire should be felt,
a repetition of these unmanly habits is preferred to
natural connection. At length there is induced a great
derangement in the digestive organs — a general las-
situde, with a weariness, often approaching to pain,
in the loins — the bowels become constipated, often in
an alarming degree — the face pale, bloated, and cada-
verous, and the body is generally flabby or emaciated,
with coldness in the extremities. Then occur trembling
hands, dim eyes, confused ringing in the ears, indis-
tinct hearing, if not entire deafness, accompanied with
frequent and violent head-ache. Drowsiness also ex-
ists, without the power to sleep, all attempts at which
are interrupted by the most £ri^lML ^^«Ki&* \sSiRfc^



I



66 THE SILENT FRIEND.

the individual becomes terrified to go to bed, lest sud-
den death shoidd be his fate ; and, during the day, he
is timid, fretful, terrified, and discontented ; has violent
palpitations of the heart, and, though he seemi^ sensible
of the cause of his distress, is unable to abandon his
habits, particularly while in bed. Under such a state
we often find instances of young men, who become
delicate, without being affected with any particular com-
plaint, and who are imhappy, but know not the cause.
They become effeminate — a complete state of imbecility,
both of body and mind at length ensues, and, in some,
the haggard coimtenance but imperfectly proclaims the
distraction of the mind. There cannot be a doubt
that this' general depravity, and these its consequences,
at length terminate the existence of thousands, who
are supposed to die from very different causes. This
is a general sketch of these s3rmptoms ; but we must
examine them more particularly.

Young men, of a good natural constitution, enter
upon that thoughtless part of their lives, and very often
by the advice and example of their schoolfellows, com-
mence improper practices, heedless of what is to be
the dreadfiil result to a very great majority of them.
If they reason at all, they calcidate, that they will
escape, however much others may have suffered, and
they thus proceed upon plans, which are, in their own
way of reasoning, of a stable nature. A ruined con-
stitution is the consequence, and then they can give
an advice which is also disregarded by others till too
late. Such improper practices, sooner or later, accord-
ing to the original vigour of constitution, subject the
individual to a train of the most awful sufferings. One
may be affected in a few months, another not perhaps
for a year or two, but none entirely escape ; they all
at length precipitate themselves into an abyss which
we should fail in attempting to describe. In some
whose organs have arrived at that state of derange-
ment which gives origin to such a complaint, the emis-
sion during connection is performed very variously. In
the early stages, the emission is sometimes scarcely
to be obtained, at least for a very great length of time :
while in others, particularly in the advanced stages, the



THE SILEKT FRIEND. 67

emission occurs inconceivably soon ; indeed, some
cannot at all perform the act of copulation before it
has taken place; while others, from the particular
morbid condition of the testicles, during which no
secretion takes place, have no emission at all.

It has also frequently been observed that different
persons were in some respects affected very differently.
Certain wanderings of the imagination, for instance,
during sleep, cause erections — the secretion of semen
goes on — the relaxed seminal vessels are unable to
retain it, and, by the very sHghtest occasional cause,
an emission takes place. In some also, very gentle
friction, such as is caused by moderate horse-back ex-
ercise, or by their clothes while walking, &c. or even
an attempt to perform sexual intercourse, is instantly
followed by an emission ; while others, although during
their dreams, they had from one to five or six emissions
in one night, could use any kind of ordinary exercise
without causing an effect of this kind ; and whose
various attempts, perhaps in the same night, to effect
such an evacuation in the natural way, were quite in-
effectual, even although the scene of action was often
protracted, and the attempt still persevered in for an
incredible length of time.

Although these are the most common periods of the
disease for such unpleasant occurrences to take place,
yet this is often reversed.

This is one of the many proofs of the impossibility
of applying general rules, too often had recourse to
in considering diseases and their treatment, and not
more particularly attending to the individual peculiari-
ties which, often, in the most unaccountable manner,
are to be found in the world. Thus while some propel
the semen vigorously, even in advanced stages of the
complaint, in others it comes off almost without the suf-
ferer being aware of it.

Fleshy excrescences, and even abscesses sometimes
break out about the anus, and at the same time there
is often also felt a degree of irritation or itching about
that part of the urethra where the seminal vessels open
into it, which is generally attributed to the presence of
strictures, to a disease of the VA^ddfit^cd ^S. ^^^^%-



68 THE SILENT FRIEND.

tate gland ; when they are merely the consequence of
diseased action in the seminal vessels themselves, and
are removeable by whatever restores them to their
healthy condition. In more advanced stages there is
often felt a stinging pain, occasionally darting along the
spermatic chord, and also an almost perpetual seem-
ingly rotatory motion felt in the testicle itself, causing
a very great degree of uneasiness to the unfortunate
patient. The scrotum is in general lax, and the tes-
ticles, (one frequently more than another,) hang down
much lower than is natural, and there is often a pain,
or certain sensation, experienced in them of the most
distressing nature. The external parts of generation
also, in common with the rest of the body, suffer con-
siderably. The penis is shrivelled, and there is often
discharged from the urethra, a sort of thinner fluid
than semen, especially while at stool.

We shall find this shrinking of the penis a very fre-
quent occurrence in these cases, because it is closely
connected with the existing state of the seminal vessels*
Thus, in castrated animals, the parts forming the peniff
shrink in a wonderful degree. Indeed, many instances
have been observed where the penis, although for-
merly of a full size, had become so small that it could
scarcely be seized between the finger and thumb, and,
on the seminal vessels being restored to health, the
penis again resumed its former size.

Some individuals are incapable of the slightest erec-
tion, while others have the most painful erections every
night, while in bed : often altogether unaccompanied
by any desire for sexual intercourse.

These not only prevent the due refreshment from
sleep, but before morning, reduce the parts to a disa-
greeable state of painful feeling, from which they
scarcely recover before the following night, when, from
the same cause, they relapse into their former state.
Indeed such sleep as is obtained, yields no sort of
comfort or refreshment, for the individual almost al-
ways feels languid and oppressed, even on getting out
of bed ; and there is an occasional sort of burning
hectic, alternated by a sensation of cold running down
the back, towards the loins, wMch coii\iiiu'&^ \o ^e«jc
twajr bia strength.




JifAtiJlril »UiU of tiK I'eiuit .(Jhlirit f>f'ii On



• I .




Itelaird siat, or !lu Ptius .( 7'fil'de Ih'



THE SILENT FRIEND. 69

The most dreadful effect of this disease, even, where
the mind is still alive to the extent of the patient*8
own wretchedness, is certainly where a sort of indes-
cribably painful twitching is felt in some parts during
the intervals, and a convulsion of the whole body is
experienced immediately after each emission. He is
even sensible of, and yet is unable to put a stop to
it; the body is drenched in cold sweat, he is op-
pressed with a most distressing faintness, and total
imbecility to move the position of his body, and the
extremities often, for hours after, lose in a great
measure, their sense of feeling.

Such is the alteration which this disease produces,
particularly in inveterate cases, that its victims be-
come totally different in every respect, both bodily and
mental, from what they formerly were. The body is
reduced from the utmost state of strength to the great-
est possible degree of debility ; in some it is bloated,
in others haggard ; but in both there is a paleness ac-
companied by blue blotches on the face, and often ulcers
on the body, which, added to their horror of mind, even
as depicted in their countenance, far exceeds the power
of description.

It is scarcely to be credited, except by those who
have frequent op{)ortunities of witnessing it, what an
astonishing effect this morbid state of the seminal ves-
sels has on every faculty of the mind as well as on the
body. While the bodily form fails, — ^while the eyes
sink in their sockets, and the vision is languid and in-
distinct — ^while he is susceptible of cold and easily af-
fected by changes of the weather, the senses also par-
take of the general wreck, and are either altogether
depraved, vitiated, or destroyed. The memory gen-
erally fails first — then the sight, the hearing, and every
faculty of the judgment are gradually, all, less or more,
impedred, till the sufferer is reduced to an almost com-
plete state of idiocy. Thus imfortunately situated, he
is perpetually overpowered by the most pain^l and
dreadful melancholy gloom ; he takes no delight in the
society even of his greatest friends ; and in constant
anguish and remorse, with perpetual restlessness, often
sheds tears at the recoUectiou oC bi» \ix^Vi\i<^ ^aX^^s^^ss^



YO THiE SILENT FRIEND.

—he pines in solitary and unavailing misery — ^none
know his distresses, and none can pity him. If in
company, he is often absent, dejected, and takes no
interest in the general conversation. He even loves to
brood over his misfortunes ; magnifies them, if pos-
sible ; is perpetually miserable, both awake and in his
dreams ; he is gloomy, morose, and suspicious that
every person is laying plans for his destruction ; his
feelings are indescribable, and he is in perpetual terror,
he knows not for what.

The stomach is not the last organ in the human system
to suffer under the complication of disarders, which this
obnoxious habit engenders. When its baneful effects
begin to be felt on the system, indigestion of the most
extraordinary and most painful character ensues. It is
preceded in some instances by loss of appetite, in others
{ftdie the contrary, but dthough the sufferer may eat
moderately or even voraciously, digestion is not performed
in a healthy manner, so as to afford the proper degree oi
nourishment and support to the system; but instead
thereof the food when in the stomach is changed by the
putrefactive fermentation, and foul and putrid eructa-
tions, with excessive flatulence arise therefrom, and
severely influence the brain, causing the most extraordi-
nary feelings in that organ, such as no pen can faithfully
describe. The strange and singular feelings which

^ patients in this state undergo, while the process of diges-
tion or ratiier of indigestion is carried on, are such as
to cause the greatest uneasiness both mental and corpo-
real, and constitute one of the most distressing of all the
complicated disorders which attend this unhappy state of
the system. A* common sign of the peculiar indigestion
attending the indulgence in the practice of the trespass
of Onan, is a sinking feeling which is not unfrequentiy
felt at the pit of the stomach, and which is so anno3ring,
that persons suflering from it are ready to undergo any
thing to get rid of it.

The organs concerned in the vital process of respira<^
tion do not escape unscathed. Breathing is rendered
hurried and short ; it becomes difficidt and painful on
flseemding staircases or heights of any kind : in fkct that

^^^ fdbcft hBB been teimed breotMessness by medical



THE SILENT FRIEND. 71

writers, is usually induced under the circumstances we
have endeavoured faintly to describe. In addition to
this, the unfortunate patient is frequently troubled with
a short dry cough, hoarseness, occasional attacks of sore
throat, weakness of the voice, an unpleasant expecto-
ration, pains about the chest, fetidity of the breath, and
many other symptoms indicative of ^e disorder affecting
the nerves supplying the chest and its contents, and the
parts of the system which are connected therewith.

The injurious effects which result from the protracted
influence of these unnatural practices, involve every
organ of the human body, whether they be of vital impor-
tance, or merely subsidiary to the great functions of life.
Thence ensue a considerable diminution of the powers ;
paleness in a greater or less degree ; sometimes a sallow,
cadaverous aspect, with pimples about the face, but par-
ticularly on the forehead, which frequently gather, and
. leave unsightly scars ; sometimes remarkable leanness,
surprising sensations at the change of the seasons, parti-
cularly in cold weather ; a heaviness and languor in the
eyes, a weakness of sight, with a considerable decay of
the faculties in general, and particularly of the memory.
We must also rank the hypochondriac melancholy under
the head of tabes dorsalis, of which it is no uncommon
attendant ; and if those who are afflicted with it give
themselves up to irregular practices, it completes all the
accidents that flow from that disorder, and renders the
patient completely miserable. The unhappy sufferers in
this malady become truly an object of compassion ; we
ought to be very careful in bestowing some time for in-
quiry into their complaints, and pay them the most
careful attention, for indeed there can hardly be a
greater degree of misery, or one more afflicting to hu-^
inanity. This disease, though perhaps one of the most
afflicting to the human mind, is that which draws the
least compassiqa from friends ; no heart seems sensible
of their distress, no soul is touched with their sufferings,,
because th^ distemper does not immediately destroy
, those whom it attacks : as if death were the greatest
evfl, and most to be avoided by human nature ; yet,
perhaps, Iq this instance, that we cannot die becomes
the greatest calamity, an^ixi^e^ ^<& xclQ!&\. ^^^^^"^^^^



?2 THE »ILENT yRIEBTD.

eomstance of the situation in whicli tlie suffen^ is
tLnfbrtunately placed. Many suicides are committed by
those labouring under this malady. To see no outlet
from the Wretched darkness in which the unhaj^y suf-
ferer is involved ; to whatever comer he turns to be
continually opposed by something like despair, which
points her dagger to the breast, and defends the sole
path which can lead to ease, and extricate the patient
from the maze, which appears impossible to the gloomy
situation of his soul : such is the criterion of this disease.
All seems bursting in upon the sufferer ; on whatever
side it is viewed no light shines upon the mind, or if it
does, it resembles those flashes of lightning in a stormy
night, which only serve to make the darkness visible,
and add horror to the scene. This is the state, in gene-
ral, of those who are unfortunately afflicted with this
disease ; this is liie situation which the unthinking and
giddy often lau^ at, because the disorder is not im-
mediately fatal. To describe every s3rmptom of ttds
disease, is to paint almost all others winch attend the
long train of sickness, so various is it in its appearance ;
yet, by strictly examining all, and attending to those
symptoms, which are the never-faHing companions of
tiiis disorder, we may trace it back to its primary cause ;
and thus settle a proper method of treating it, and per-
haps effectuate a cure by going directly to its origin.
In diseases, where the symptoms are so numerous and
apparently so contradictory, to discover one which will
assign a cause for the rest, is what is to be wished, and
always to be endeavoured after. This, it appears to us,
may be obtained in this instance, and without much
difficidty, where the practitioner has a good shioe of
experience : not unfrequently, the abuse of Uie frmc-
tions of generation are die preceding causes, destroying
the appetite and lessening the vital heat, thus producing
the very same s3rmptoms that follow the other fbrms of
disease arising from the same cause.

The symptoms then, as they are genera^y found in
various persons, imder the inauspicious influence g£ this
malady, are nearly related to those affections of die hu-
man jframe which have been previously mentioned, and
4Uis UB follow :



THE 6ILENT FRIBKD. 73

Not unfrequentlj spasms, like those attending epileptic
fits, a grievous head-ache, confined to a very small spot
of the head, palpitations of the heart, sometimes a dry
cough, those complaints resembling the iliac passion giv-
ing the countenance a sallow tinge, like the jaundice ; also
oomplaints exactly resembling the gravel. Very often a
pain from the back of the head, do\fn the whole length
of the spine or back-bone. The legs sometimes sweU,
but «re distinguished from the h3rdropic, by their not pit-
ting, and by the swelling being greater in the morning ;
a sensation of cold in all the external parts, when the pa-
tient is attacked periodically ; this symptom generally
begins the paroxysm, and continues while it lasts ; the
urine is sometimes limpid, and in large quantity, at other
tones the contrary, with sometimes a chalky farinaceous
and pink-cdoured sediment ; foetid or sour eruotadons
from the stomach, and a rising in the throat ; frequently
a low pulse, sometimes a cadaverous aspect, great dejec-
tion of spirits, and internal sinkings ; at other times t^urs,
without any cause to provoke them ; the soul appearing
to be sick rather than the body, cherishing as it were
the idea of its own sufferings.

Other writers, besides those who have been already
alluded to, have spoken of the baneful consequences of
onanism. Oelsus in his excellent work on the preserva-
tsan of health, says, *^ these pleasures are always hurtful
lo tiie strongest constitutions ; and how much more so
must they prove to such as are of delicate frames. ' ' Galen
too has observed that the same causes occasion disorders
of the brain and of the nerves, and destroy the powers.
He also mentions the case of a man, who was labouring
tinder the effects of this malady^ and who died while
attempting the act of conjugal infterco;irse. Pliny the
naturalist mentions two sfuch instances.

The effect of this 'baneful practice upoa a nobleman of
Benie, in Switzerland, the history of whose case is handed
down to us by Platenus, could be attributed to nothing
but the spasms he had brought upon himself in his
«arly life. He entered, says this celebrated physician,
upon marriage, at an advanced age, with a view to get
an faek to his estates and ^honours ; and at the tixa^ W
was endeayouring to coMMTtvimAr. \:i^ i^sx^^^^s^^ \^



74 THE SILENT FRIEND.

seized with a violent suffocation, which obliged him to
discontinue.

The like accident happened to him every time he
made the same attempt. He applied to Platerius for his
assistance, who, finding him in apparent good health in
other respects, was somewhat surprised at his case, till he
had related the history.

Platerius told him he was sorry he had not made ap-
plication before. It was his duty to advise him to desist
from any more attempts, till such time as he tried the
effects of his remedies. But his advice was not followed.
The Swiss noble ventured on a fresh essay ; the event
was immediately the same as before, but, being resolved
to go through with the operation, he died in the very
act in the arms of his wife. His body was examined
after death, and the seminal vessels were to be discovered
eroded with corrupted matter, which Platerius supposed
caused the spasms, and ultimately by the depressing
influence they exerted on the nervous system, caused his
death.

Emission in the unnatural way is accompanied with
a kind of convulsive epilepsy. The weakness which
follows the act has appeared to several persons, and not
without reason, as a proof that it could not be solely
the privation of semen which occasioned it : but what
demonstrably proves how much the spasms must weaken
the human frame, is the feeble state of many of the
patients who have fallen under our care, at various
periods in life, labouring under maladies arising there-
from : we have seen some affected as if epilepsy had
attacked them.

Tulpius, the celebrated physician of Amsterdam, has
published the particulars of a case well calculated to shew
the horrible consequences resulting from this dreadful
practice. " Samuel Verspretius," he says, " applied to
him for advice ; his complaint was, a flux of seminal mat-^
ter which flowed from him at all times, but particularly
when at stool, and in the company of women, without
having the powers of manhood; in length of time it
became sharp and acrimonious, attended with great
pain. After this, a scorbutic eruption broke out on
the bmd part of ids head and the nape of his neck;;



THE SILENT PRIEND. 75

tkenoft it extended to the spinal marrow, the loins, the
buttocks, and the articulation of the thigh, which made
this unfortunate man suffer such excruciating pains,
that his countenance was distorted, and he was seized
with a slow fever, which by degrees consumed him, but
not so fast as he desired ; and he was in such a situa-
tion, that he frequently invoked death, before it snatched
him from his misery."

As has been already stated, all the important viscera
of the body are involved in the complication of symp*
toms which characterise the indulgence either d the
sexual passion in great excess, or of the still worse and
•till more destructive habit of masturbation. As a
matter of course the heart, the central organ of circula-
tion, which in every respect must evidently be greatly
excited in all the acts of generation, could not escape.
Indeed when we consider the increased energy of the
drculation during the act of sexual intercourse, and.
bear in mind the hurried breathing and the powerful
action of the heart, we cannot be surprised that its re-
peated excitement during the act of manustupration,
practised so frequently as it generally is, should tend to
induce serious derangement of the fimction, and to
cause palpitations, which if not constant, are easily
brought on by the slightest cause.

Another and very efficient reason may also be al-
leged for the disordered action of the heart under the
circumstances to which we have alluded, and that is the
enormous expenditure of the nervous fluid which neces-
sarily takes place, as a consequence of the act we have
so often characterised as dangerous and unmanly in the
extreme. Physiologists have long been doubtful whe-
ther the animal spirit and the nervous fluid are the
same ; but observation teaches us that those two fluids
if not identical, have a very strict analogy, and the loss
of the one or of the other produces similar evils to the
constitution.

The eyesight again suflers greatly from these prac-
tices. The eyeUds become affected with a chronic
kind oi inflammation, and secrete a watery fluid dur-
ing the day, which at night-time becomes thick and
inspiasatedy so that the eyeiidB^ V)lDtf»i^ ^^«x^ss^s^ «s^



76 THE SILBKT FRIEND.

protectors of the organs of vision, become adherent to-
gether, and cannot be separated without trouble and
difficulty. The eyes themselves also are engaged in
the general mischief — the sight becomes dim, a veil
as it were hangs over the organs, impeding their utility,
and rendering it impossible to keep them occupied in
examining one object continuously for a certain length
of time. If not previously in that condition, the un-
happy victim of so much misery speedily becomes
short-sighted, or myopic ; dark spots float before the
eyes ; flashes and corruscations of light are seen im-
pinging on the nerves of vision, which become so sen-
sibly weakened, as to render it almost impossible to use
the organs in any ordinary avocation after daylight,
while the bright fight so divinely shed on the earth by
that glorious luminary, the sun, becomes painful and
annoying to eyes, weakened in their nervous energy
by the exhausting drain to which the system has been
80 long subjected.

" A consultation, ' * says Hoflinan, * * was held on a young
man, who, among other ills which he had drawn upon
himself by unnatural practices, was afflicted with a
great weakness of sight. This young man, having
given way to this practice, at the age of fifteen, till he
was three and twenty, was at that period seized with
such a weakness in Hs head and eyes, that the latter
were frequently affected with violent spasms at the time
of his seminal emissions. When he wanted to read
anything, he was taken with such a kind of stupor, as
intoxication creates ; the pupils of his eyes were very
much dilated, and he suffered exquisite pain in them.
The lids were very heavy, and aft«r shutting themselves
at night, a whitish foul matter gathered in their cor-
ners, which were painful. He frequently shed tears
without being able to assign the cause of his melancholy.
Although his appetite was very good, he was reduced
almost to a skeleton, and as soon as he had done eating,
he was in a kind of intoxication.''

The organ of hearing, like all the other organs of

the body, having its supply of nervous fluid diminished

in consequence of the great demand made on the

fi/stem by the unnatural excitement Qf the ]^arts of geii-



THE SILEVT FRIEND. 77

eration, fails in the performance of its duties. Per-
sons living under this wretched exhaustion of the frame,
become deaf, and are affected with a singing in the
ears, and other noises which become painfully dis-
tressing.

" I have seen a patient," says the illustrious pro-
fessor Boerhaave, " whose disorder began by lassitude,
and a weakness in all the parts of the body, but par-
ticularly towards his loins ; it was attended with an
involuntary motion of the tendons, periodical spasms,
and bodily decay, insomuch as to destroy the whole
corporeal frame ; he felt a pain even in the membranes
of the brain ; a pain which patients call a dry burning
heat, and which incessantly bums internally the most
noble parts : I have also seen a young man afflicted
with the tabes dorsalis. His person was very agree-
able, and he had been a youth of elegant form ; al-
though he was cautioned not to give way too much to
pleasure, he nevertheless 3rielded to its impulse ; he
became so deformed before his death, that the fleshy
substance, which appears above the spinal apophyses
of the loins, was entirely wasted. His brain appeared
consimied ; in fact he became stupid. He became
rigid in all his articulations. I never perceived so great
a want of motion in the body from any other cause.
His eyes sunk, grew dull, and he lost the power of
sight." On opening his body, after death, the seminal
ducts which open into the urethra were found com-
pletely corroded from the morbid state of the parts ;
which appeared to be in a putrid state, and the matter
having been absorbed into the circulation had brought
on a consumption. His lungs appeared to be decayed,
and his liver obstructed, his kidneys were diseased, and
even the mucus which lines the intestines was found in
a purulent and corrupted state.

The first object of medical treatment in this state of
things, is to endeavour to convince our patient of the
impropriety of the act of onanism ; after which, if it be
timely abandoned, the remedies hereinafter enumerated
will be required. An idea may be formed of the im-
portance of the seminal liquor, by observing the effects
it produces as soon as it begms to\^eioTT£A^\ ^^^^ssr.^>



78 THE SILENT FRIEND*

the physiognomy, and features of the face change ; the
beard grows, and the whole body often takes another
appearance, because the muscles acquire a firmness
and power, forming a sensible difference between the
body of an adult person and that of a youth not yet
arrived at the age of puberty ; these changes are pre-
vented by destroying that organ which serves to separate
the liquor that produces it ;* and experience has shewn
that the amputation of the testicles, at the age of virility,
has made the beard fall, a puerile voice return, and the
whole frame become effeminate.

Can the power of its operation on the body be ques-
tioned after this, or can any one entertain a doubt of
the various ills that must necessarily flow from a pro-
fuse and rapidly repeated evacuation of a humour that
is so precious. Its destination determines the only
proper method of its being evacuated. Certain dis-
tempers cause it sometimes to run off. It may be and
frequently is involuntarily lost in lascivious dreams.

If the dangerous effects of the too abundant discharge
of this humour depended only upon the quantity, or
were the same when the quantities were equal, it
would be of little importance, in a physical sense, whe-
ther this evacuation were occasioned by either of the
methods mentioned : but the manner is in this respect
much more than equal to the substance. Too great a
quantity of semen being lost in the natural course, pro-
duces very direful effects : but they are more dreadful
when the same quantity has been dissipated in an un-
natural manner, from the extraordinary effects which
are produced on the nervous system. The accidents
which happen to such as exhaust themselves in a natural
way, are very terrible : those which are occasioned by
masturbation are infinitely more so.

Sanctorius furnishes us in his own Observations with
the primary cause of this peculiar danger. " Moderate
coition " says he "is useful when nature solicits for it ;
when it is solicited by the imagination, it weakens all
the faculties, and particularly the memory." This is
easily explained. Nature in a state of health, does not
inspire desires ; but when the vesiculce seminales are
replete with a quantity of liquor, which has acquired



THE SILENT FEIEND* 79

suoh a degree of thickness as to render its return into
the mass of blood difficult ; under these circumstances,
when an evacuation follows, we may be assured that the
body will not be thereby sensibly weakened. But such
is the organization of the genital parts, that their action
and the desires which succeed are put into play, not
only by the presence of a super-abundant seminal
humour, but also the imagination having great influence
upon these parts, it may, by being occupied by desire,
put them into such a situation as serves reciprocally
to excite them ; and desire leads to the act which is
more pernicious in proportion as it is unnecessary.
This organ of convenience is like all others, which are
never properly actuated, but when nature stimulates
them. Hunger and thirst indicate the want of food and
drink ; if a greater quantity of either be taken than these
sensations require, the surplus prejudices and weakens
the body. The necessity of going to stool and voiding
urine, is signified by certain physical conditions ; but
a bad habit may so far influence the constitution of the
organs, that the necessity of these evacuations may no
longer depend upon the quantity of matter to be evacu>
ated. We subject ourselves to want without being in
want ; and such is the case of masturbators. It is
imagination, habit, and not nature, that importunes
them. They drain nature of that which is necessary,
and also of that which she herself would have taken
care to dispose of in a manner better adapted to the exi-
gencies of the system. At length, in consequence of
that law of the animal economy, whereby humours are
attracted by irritation, there is a continual afflux of
humours upon these parts, and that which Hippocrates
formerly observed occurs, '' when a man practices coition,
the seminal vessels are dilated, and attract the semen."
This however, as has been already observed more than
once, occurs in a much more marked and more injurious
manner, when it is excited by the act of masturbation,
than when it originates from the mo^v&t^ ^igoyment
of sexual intercourse.

It has been already observed, and in support of the
<^)8ervation we have quoted the authority of the mo&t
distinguished practitioners o£ 1^ \8a\i «^^ \s3n:sEi^ %s{^>

H



80 THE SILENT FRTEND.

that irregular practices are more pernicious to the
constitution than excesses conunitted with women. We
are told in holy writ, that the young female who lay with
David increased his strength. In Qiat of irregular prac-
tices the individual loses, and receives nothing. Hence
we may discover, in observing the effect of the passions,
a difference in those who addict themselves to women,
and those who are habituated to irregular practices ; a
difference that is totally to the disadvantage of the latter.
That joy which the heart is sensible of, and which should
be nicely distinguished from that voluptuousness solely
corporeal, which man enjoys in conunon with animals, and
from which it is completely distinct ; this joy aids diges-
tion, animates the circulation, accelerates all the functions,
restores strength and supports it.

If this be found united with the pleasures of love, it
contributes to repair, it contributes to restore what they
stole by force ; and observation proves it. Sanctorius,
a most ingenious physician and professor, at Padua, who
flourished in the last century, has remarked it.

His words are : " After excessive coition with a
woman that is beloved, a man is not sensible of the las-
situde which should follow this excess, provided the
seminal tubes which convey the semen into the urethra
are not eroded with purulent matter, because the joy
which the soul feels increases the strength of the heart,
favours the functions and repairs what was lost." Upon
this principle Venette, another very ingenious physician
(in whose works we find a good chapter on the dangers
attendant on imnatural venery), maintains that having
correspondence with a handsome woman does not ex-
haust so much as with an ugly woman. — " Beauty has
charms which dilate the heart and multiply its spirits."

We shall range under seven heads, the ills of which
patients complain.

I. — Involuntary nocturnal emissions; pains in the
back, and often in the head ; weakness of the memory
and sight ; and a mucous discharge from the urethra^
especially after straining at a discharge of tiie excre-
ments ; an aching pain, rolling, and a pendulous condition
of the testicles, as represented in the plate. The testicles



THE SILENT FRIEND. 81

being the secretory organs of the genital fluid, are frir^
nished with arteries, veins, lymphatics, and nerves, like
other glands, and are suspended by the cremaster musclek
When, therefore, from any cause, the texture is weakened,
a pain will be felt, and this is increased by their hang-
ing down, caused by that general relaxation of fibres
that aflects the whole body, and the cremaster muscle in
particular.

II. — AU the intellectual faculties are weakened, loss
of memory ensues, the ideas are clouded, and there is
an incapability to attend to general business and even to
ordinary occupations, reading, writing, the society of
friends, etc. ; the patients sometimes fall into a slight
madness, they have an incessant irksome uneasiness,
continued anguish, and so keen a remorse of conscience
that they frequently shed tears. They are subject ix>
vertigo ; all llieir senses, but particularly the sight and
hearing, are weakened; and their sleep, if they can
obtain any, is disturbed with frightful dreams.

III. — The power of the body decays, and the growth
of such as abandon themselves to those abominable prac-
tices before it is accomplished, is greatly prevented.
Some cannot sleep at all ; others are in a perpetual state
of drowsiness. They are all aflected with hysterical or
hypochondriac complaints, and are overcome with the
accidents that accompany those snievous disorders —
melancholy, sighing, tears, palpitations, suffocations, and
faintimrs. Some emit a calcareous saliva ; cou&^hs, slow
feTe»!lmd consumptions, are chastisement whkh others
meet with for their crimes.

IV. — The most acute pains form another object of
patients* complaints; some are thus aflected in their
heads, others in their chest, stomach, and intestines ;
others have external rheumatic pains ; aching numbness
in parts of their body, when they are slightly pressed.

V. — Pimples not only appear in the Jace^ (this is
one of the most common symptoms,) but even suppu-
rating blisters and carbuncles upon the nose, chest
and thighs : and jpainfrd itching in the same parts.
One patient compkoned even of the fleshy excrescences
upon his forehead. All these symptoms show to "vh&t.
an impure condition the bloo& Va leAnfifi^



82 THE SILENT FRIEND.

VI. — The organs of generation also participate in
that misery of which they are the primary cause. Many
peUients are incapable of erection ; others discharge
their seminal liqnor upon the slightest titillation and
ibe most feeble erection, or in the efforts they make
when at stool. Many are affected with a constant gon^
orrhea, which entirely destroys their powers, and the
discharge resembles fetid matter or mucus. Others
are tormented with painful priapism, dysuria, stran-
gury, heat of urine, and difficulty in rendering it, which
greatly torments them. Some have painfid tumours
upon their testicles, penis, bladder, and spermatic cord.
In'a word, either the impracticability of coition, or a
deprivation of the genital liquor, renders every one
imbecile, and more or less impotent, who has for any
length of time given way to this crime.

VII. — The functions of the intestines are sometimes
quite disordered, and some patients complain of stub-
bom constipation, others of hemorrhoids, of a fetid
matter from the Amdament, or else of occasional and
troublesome attacks of diarrhoea.

The physiognomy, that faithful mirror of the state of
soul and body, gives the first indication of the internal
disorder. The complexion and plimipness, which jointly
confer a youthful look, and which is the sole substitute
of beauty (for without this even beauty produces no
other effect than cold admiration,) are the first things
that disappear ; then a leanness succeeds, and the ski^
becomes rough and dry, and tinged of a lead colour ;
the eyes lose their brilliancy and deaden, and by their
languor express that of the whole frame ; (See Plate 5
No, 1 ;) the lips lose their Vermillion hue, the teeth
their whiteness ; and in a word it is no uncommon thing
for the whole body to receive such a shock, as for the
shape to become entirely distorted.

The increase of dangerous consequences flowing from
masturbation, is too obvious to need comment ; persons
suffering therefrmn are too sensible of it themselyes^
from, the shockmg remorse with which it is followed.
When illness has opened the criminal's eyes, he sees his
ixrimes and danger, and feels

"Tbe atiBf of pleaswre wMeh lemone suaqmOa.**



THE SILENT FRIEND. 83

When the mask is dropped, and the real picture of their
conduct appears in its most hideous colours, they find
themselves guilty of a crime, the punishment for which
divine justice ordained nothing less than a slow and
lingering death, approaching with the most fearful
tortures, both bodily and mental, to which any human
heing can be subjected.

These various consequences are so completely illus-
trated and embodied in the following case, that it would
be wrong to omit quoting it : —

L.D. was by profession a watch-maker ; he had lived
prudently, and enjoyed a good state of health till he
was about seventeen years of age. At this period he
gave himself up to self-pollution, which he repeated
every day, sometimes even to the third time, the evacu-
ation being always preceded by a slight insensibility,
and a convulsive motion in the extending muscles of
the head, which drew it very much back, whilst the
neck was extremely swelled. A year had not elapsed
before he began to feel a weakness after every act.
-This notification was not sufficient to rescue him from
his filthy practices — ^his soul already devoted to this ex-
citement was incapable of appreciating any other, and
the repetition of his crime became every day more fre-
quent, tiU such time as he was in a state to apprehend
die approach of death. Grown wise too late, the evil
had already made so great a progress that he was incu-
rable, and the genital parts were become so irritated
and were so weak, that it was no longer necessary that
this imhappy youth should be an agent in order to shed
his own seed : the slightest irritation immediately pro-
cured an imperfect erection, which was followed by an
evacuation of this liquor, so that his weakness daily in-
creased. The spasms of which he was not before sensi-
ble but in consummating the act, and which then ceased
therewith, then became habitual, and frequently attacked
him without any apparent cause, in so violent a manner,
that during the whole period of the fit, which sometimes
lasted fifteen hours and never less than eight, he felt
such violent pain in the back of the neck, that he not only
screamed out, but absolutely howled, and all this while
it was impossible for him to sm£L<^^ %Ocl^ ^t ^^s£i^«



84 THE SILENT FRIEND.

. His voice became hoarse, he entirely lost his strength,
and was obliged to give up his profession, being alto-
gether incapable of attending to it. Thus overwhelmed
in misery, he langidshed almost without any assistance
for some months, and was the more to be pitied, for
what memory he had remaining, and which he was at
length entirely bereft of, only served him to take an in-
cessant retrospect of the cause of his misfortunes, his
wretchedness being consequently continually increased
by the aggravating horrors of remorse. He less resem-
bled a living creature than a corpse ; lying upon straw,
meagre, pale, and filthy, casting forth an infectious
stench, almost incapable of motion, a watery palish
blood issuing from the nose, the tongue frightfully swel-
led, and saliva constantly flowing from his mouth. (See
plate 5, No. 2, of the case*) Having a diarrhoea, he
voided his excrement in the bed without knowing it ;
he had a continued flux of semen : his sore watery eyes
were deadened to that degree that he could not move
them ; his pulse was very small, quick, and frequent.
It was with great difficulty he breathed, reduced al-
most to a skeleton in every part except his feet, which
became dropsical. The disorder of his mind was equal
to that of his body ; devoid of ideas and memory, inca-
pable of connecting two sentences, without being af-
flicted at his fate, without any sensation than pain which
returned with every fit, at least every third day : — ^far
below the brute creation, he was a spectacle, the hor-
rible sight of which cannot be conceived, and it was
difficult to discover that he had formerly made part of
the himian species. He died at the end of a few weeks,
his body having become generally dropsical.

All who give themselves up to this odious and crimi-
nal habit, are not so severely pimished \ but there are
none who are not so more or less. The frequency of the
pollution, the variety of temperaments^ and several cir-
cumstances independent of either, occasion considerable
differences. The symptoms we have the most frequently
witnessed axe a total derangement of the stomach, which
in some announces itself by loss of appetite or by an
irregular desire for food ; in others acute pains, above
sitll diinng the tim^ of digestiou» ok. habitual vomitings^







W"^




• ■ ■• ■



".\ '



TH£ SILENT FRIEKD. 85

'whicH resist every remedy, so long as they continue Ihmr
vicious habits ; a weakness of the organs of respira*
tion, whence frequently residt dry cough, almost always
hoarseness, weakness of voice, and shortness of breath
upon making any short violent exertion, and finally a
total relaxation of the nervous system.

Let us here be permitted to insert the fragments
of some letters, which united will form a sufficiently
complete picture of the physical disorders produced
by masturbation. " I plainly feel,'* wrote one patient,
'*that this bad practice has diminished the strength
of my faculties, and above all of the memory." I,
like many other young persons had the misfortime to
give way to the habit as pernicious to body as to the
soul : age, assisted by reason, has for some time since
cured ine of that wretched penchant, but the evil is
done. To an affection and extraordinary sensitiveness
of the nervous system, and the accidents it occasions,
are added a weakness, an uneasiness, an ennui, a dis-
tress of mind, which seem pertinaciously to adhere to
me ; I am worn out by an almost continual loss of
semen ; my countenance is become pale and almost
cadaverous. The weakness of my body renders all
motion a trouble to me ; that of my legs is frequently
such that I have great difficulty in keeping myself on
my feet, and I dare not venture to leave my room. My
digestion is so bad, that my food passes through me
almost unchanged, three or four hours after taking it.
My chest is loaded with phlegm, which keeps me in
continual pain, and the expectoration wears me out.
This is a brief description of my miseries, which are
still more aggravated by the mournful certitude I have
acquired that each succeeding day will be more painful
than the previous one."

** Did not religion restrain me," says another, " I
should already have put an end to a life so much the
more cruel, as it is my own fault."

In fact, there is no situation in the world worse than
that of mental affliction : pain is nothing in comparison
with it, and when joined to a crowd of physical evils,
it is not astonishing that the suffei^t %W^^ ^^ Hss^
death as the greatest blessing) wA wstcsv^^t \j&a^'>^



86 THE SILENT FRIEND.

80 wretched an existence can be called life — as a real
misfortune.

The following description is more brief and less ter*-
rible : —

'*I had the misfortune to contract that pernicious
habit, which soon ruined my temperament ; but above
all of late years, my state has been truly pitiable : my
nerves are extremely weak, my hands are always trem-
bling, without power, and continually clammy with per-
spiration ; I am subject to violent spasms in the stomach,
pains in the arms, the legs, sometimes in the loins and
chest, frequently so as to induce severe and harassing
cough ; my appetite is voracious, yet I fall away con-
siderably, and my face every day becomes more ca-
daverous."

" Nature has discovered to me," writes a third, " the
cause of the debility I have fallen into, and the danger
of the abyss in which I was precipitating myself, both
by the pimples and blisters which showed themselves
in the part which was the instrument of my crime, and
by the weakness I felt during the commission of the
crime itself, and which did not permit me to doubt of its
being the cause of it."

We might here add a great number of relations of
similar diseases for which we have been consulted, but
t^ey would only be useless repetitions.

Nothing, perhaps, weakens the intellect so much as
these pernicious practices, which take possession of the
whole mind and attention, and prevent tiieir victims from
following their respective vocations, by engrossing
their faculties with the most lascivious thoughts and
their consequences, even when they should be em-*
ployed in devotion or business ; rendering them stupid,
dull, and thoughtful, and destroying their vivamtyj
cheerfulness, and health : bringing on consumption,
weakness, barrenness, and all that dreadful train of
complaints, which makes them timid, imeertain, full of
whims, and ridiculous. The mind is agitated with
frightful ideas and horrid dreams, which ultimately ren-
der them fearful of being left alone for a few minutes.
Surely 5uch a train of miseries might be sufficient to
deter young peiisons from, entexmg on «>uG.\i comses 1-



THE SILENT FRIEND. 87

They should take time to consider, that every act of
this kind strikes deeply at the root of the constitationi
inevitably hastens the attack of many alarming diseases^
and brings on during the prime of manhood, all tke
languishing infirmities of old age, and finally prematnre
dissolution.

How weak, then, must be their intellect, who seek
for pleasure by delusive and deceitful means. Tme
Micity and earthly happiness can never attend those
whose faculties of mind and body are corrupted and
buried in the vortex of imaginary and unnatural en-
joyment and desires. If those, then, who labour under
the mental infatuation of such poisonous principles,
would let reason resume its sway, and nature her pre-
rogative, how sudden would be iiie transition from all
ideal, to real and substantial bliss ! For if life's nature
in all its various forms, conditions, and demands, be-
comes invalid, and the passions and sensibility of the
frame corrupted, how can you possibly anticipate the
attainment of reciprocal love and conjugal regard,
when the basis is destroyed, and you have yourselves ren*
dered its organs incompetent, and perverted its source
and influence ? But another all powerful claim hangs
over you, a sacred debt, an awful responsibility and
duty which you owe to your inheritance, your fore-
fathers, and above all, to your Creator, who or-
dained you for the propagation of mankind, and that
you should not destroy the powers bestowed upon yon,
by followng a destructive habit of so immoral a ten-
dency, of so heart-rending a description, and of so de-
grading a nature.

Then let us urge the victims of such deadly self-in-
temperance no longer to continue to dwell in the pur-
gatory of such sin, but by self-castigation throw off the
bitter infatuation, and by a persevering endeavour regain
the blessings of mankind.

It is chiefly on the youth of both sexes that self-pol-
lution commits most ravages. This is so much the more
mischievous, and so much more to be deplored, as it
thus strikes at the very root of society, and has a direct
and immediate tendency to destroy it^ b^ e:Q£XH«iQCB%
and debilitating, almost fxoni 1ubfi»x "^t^ts ^x^fi^^^ *^)S«^






88 THS SILBNT FRIBKD.

indiTidnals whom nature's God intended as best adapted
to preserve and adorn it. How many of these debili-
tated and emaciated objects daily present themselves
to our view, with pallid and haggard countenances and
sunken eyes, who are indebted solely to the abomi-
nable practice of masturbation for this wretched state of
debility and exhaustion ! Disabled from rendering any
service either to themselves or friends, they drag on a life
totally useless to others and a burden to themselves, in
the midst of society in which they are despised.

It were needless to expatiate more upon the dangers
pecuHar to masturbation ; they are but too real, and too
well demonstrated.

Having .described the dreadful effects resulting from
the practice of self-pollution, we shall now enter upon
the

METHOD OF TREATMENT AND CURE ;

and, in the first place must observe, that before any
remedy can he administered with any prospect of success,
the patient must determine on abstaining entirely from
the practice of this heinous crime, this abominable sin,
condemned alike by God and man ; and here we may
observe that this in general is the most difficult point to
get over, for when it is habitual it holds such a power-
ful sway over the mind, that the most determined men-
tal energy is required to overcome this dreadfrd pro-
pensity.

To restrain the passions of the mind is a more dif-
ficult undertaking than to improve the body. We fre-
quently observe male quadrupeds remarkably coura-
geous, and impelled by furious desires after their arrival
at puberty ; but a lively imagination and social prin-
ciple renders love a much stronger and more durable
passion in human beings, than in any other species of
the animal kingdom. Consumption, tabes dorsalis, tre-
mor of the nerves, and premature old age, as already
frequently stated in the pages of this work, are not un-
usual consequences of undue sexual excitement ^among
the jouth of the present day, while madness, melan-
cboljr and sometimes suicide axe tine tce^ent teault^



THE SILENT FRIEND. 89

both of disappointed love and of the exhaustion of the
nervous system consequent on venereal excess and on
the practice of onanism.

Unfortunately neither the sedative powers of leaden
girdles, the anti-spasmodic virtues of camphor bags, nor
the cooling properties of nitre have any other than an im-
aginary effect in subduing this powerftd passion, which
requires the exertion of the rational faculties to give a
proper direction to the laws of nature. Hence arises
the utility of a virtuous education to restrain unruly
passions, particularly when youth begin to throw off the
authority of parents. The principle of shame, and
habit of self-denial ought to be strongly impressed on
the young mind before the arrival of this period of
life. Dissolute companions, dalliance between the
sexes, and the high coloured extravagant fictions of
some novels which influence the imagination, and ex-
cite a state of morbid sensibility ought to be cau-
tiously guarded against. The passions awakened be-
fore their natural season are the common destroyers
of the youth of both sexes. And after they are fully
established, too much attention cannot be had to the
choice of proper associates, and the selection of the
best recreations. To keep the mind and body in a
state of constant emplo3rment, and to observe tem-
perance in diet and drink, are the most essential cor-
rectives, morally speaking, of the inexperience, en-
thusiasm, aud impetuosity of persons in the youthful
age. These remarks are equaUy applicable to the cor-
rection as to the preventives of bad habits. This task
is however by so much the more difficult.

Let reason then resimie her seat, and become a con-
vert to chastity and honour, for the debility of Nature
can be completely reinstated by the celebrated

CORDIAL BALM OF SYRIACUM,

which has restored bodily and sexual strength and vigour
to hundreds of debilitated individuals, of both sexes,
previously deemed past recovery by professional men
of the first eminence and respectability, and numbers of
whom for the purpose of benefittii^f mankind, haye
come forward and personallj a\X/^\;^ xc^xlqw^'^s^sss.



90 THE SILENT FRIEND.

wcmderful release from intense suffering, and speedy
recovery from inveterate complaints; its re-animating
powers almost exceed credibility ; by its fine rich stim-
ulatiiig balsamic and stomachic qualities, it causes the
purification of the blood, and also the complete re-
invigoration of the nervous system, so that the faculties
become restored to their proper power and functions,
and the &llen fabric of life is raised up to beauty, con-
sistency, and duration, while the evidences of prema-
ture decay give place to soimd and pristine health.

In that part of our practice in particular where the
Cordial Balm of Striacum requires to be employed,
it would be unreasonable in us not to expect the most
determined opposition, party spirit being exerted ex-
actly in proportion to the good effects of any newly
proposed remedy for the cure of disease ; and the pro-
poser, together with the remedy, without a fair trial
being given either to the opinions of the one or the
power of the other, is often overpowered and put down
by that concentrated mass of stupidity and influence,
through which the light of science can rarely penetrate.
Such contracted views are calculated solely for the com-
fort and happiness of those who entertain them, not,
except in mere form, for the alleviation of that mass of
human misery, which while it perpetually surrounds us,
calls aloud for our interference and relief.

Since our former publication on the use of this won-
derful medicine appeared, we have had numerous op-
portunities, not only of confirming the doctrines there
advanced, but of carrying out our views to a much
greater extent than we ever expected. Our experience
on this subject is now not only general, but on the
principles we then hastily delivered, is uniformly suc-
cessful ; the numerous favourable commimications,
which we daily receive from every part of the United
Kingdom, convince us, that in a much shorter time
than important improvements in the practical part of
oar art commonly meet with public sanction, this prac-
tice will, under proper regulations, at once become still
more general, and even more extensively successfol.

No disease to which the human frame is liable, is
treated more by stubborn, general, and IkBdcoied rules



THE SILENT FRIEND. 91

than those of the generative system ; whereas except-
ing in their very nnldest form, none require more close
attention. This generalising plan, or total n^lect,
sometimes on the part of the patient, sometimes on the
part of the surgeon, and sometimes on the part of both,
and even injudicious treatment, which must solely be
owing to the medical attendant, have often reduced a
once healthy and robust constitution to the greatest pos-
sible degree of lingering misery. The various effects
that urethral discharges have upon the animal frame,
depend greatiy on the influence they exert on the mind :
in some, nocturnal emissions lay the foundation of seminal
weakness and gleet, and cases occur where the system
having long laboured under the influence of nocturnal
emissions, feels more powerfully than it would imder
other circumstances the nervous irritation which usually
accompanies a profuse discharge of the semen ; prov-
ing beyond doubt, the existence of chronic debility;
for that which has litUe effect on one constitution, will
produce in others symptoms extremely harassing both
to the body and mind ; and thus a complex derange-
ment arises, the combined result of a concatenation of
events that may be traced, even with mathematical
precision, to the debilitating cause : for we are led to
infer that seminal weakness precedes this nervous de-
rangement : and to us it is evident, that when nervous
debility exists, the nocturnal emissions are increased ;
the repetition of them unquestionably weakens the vitsd
energyVand after an indefinite peri^, predisposes the
cerebral organs to morbid irritation. Thus from S3rm-
pathy with the nerves, the general system becomes
distiirbed, and the body and mind are rendered suscep*
tible to the caprice of that vicissitude of irritation whose
universality of influence can only be described by those
who have felt its energy : nor is the effect of this influx
ence the offspring of a fervid or depressed imagination :
on the contrary, a class of painful and distressing diseases
ia originated, which, in their progress, have a great effect
on the organization. This morbid irritability more fre-
quentiy attends on constitutions previously debilitated
by venereal excess, or, more firequentiy stilly by the
baneful habit of onanism^ \>y vi\u.Oev \!!Ei<& ^^Xs^ ^x^^ssjv.



92 THE SILENT FBIEND.

only 80 weakened, but are also rendered so irritaHe,
and from habit, so easily excited by mental influences,
that the slightest stimulus is sufficient to call them into
action, and thereby produce a discharge of vitiated
semen.

This disease arises from a spontaneous erection of
the penis, often imperfect, and a discharge of semen im-
solicited by the patient, who frequently is unconscious
of it till awakened by the act of emission : this is
caused either by the distended and congested state of
the vessels, or is the consequence of lascivious dreams
inspired by the general unhealthy tone and excited
condition of the brain and the other organs connected
with the function of generation. Of this act men are
mostly unconscious ; if however it arrests attention, its
frequency and its consequences are the circumstances
that rouse the proper and natural fears of the sufferer.
Frequently occurring nocturnal emissions are a decided
proof of debility, and the certain harbinger of ap-
proaching impotence. Our ample experience war-
rants the conclusion that the debility is more obviously
confirmed, and absolute impotence more certainly fol-
lows in those instances where emissions occur pretty fre-
quently, the sufferer waking suddenly in the night, at
the moment of the discharge. In many instances the
sleep is not broken, and it is comparatively difficult to
ascertain how often the evacuation occurs : the conse-
quences of the loss of the seminal fluid are however
sufficiently evident. Occurring more frequently than
can be fairly ascribable to the distention of healthy
vessels, the most energetic measures are instantly re-
quisite to avert the same amount of mischief, which
would arise if the loss of the seminal secretion were
solicited and voluntary. The only remedy, perhaps,
of real efficacy, and from which, by perseverance^ a
permanent cure will be obtained, is ** The Coedial
Balm of Syriacum," which is possessed of this ad-
mirable quality, in preference to any other ever yet
discovered, that with little or no stimulus, it restores the
tone of the system, in a manner incredible to those who
have not observed its effects.
It 18 £rom a strong impression that no cure can be



THE SILENT FRIEND. 93

efibcted, that this disease has been allowed to make
progress ; and hence has arisen that melancholy train
of diseases connected with general debility. With this
prejudice is connected the fear of not being able to per-
form the grand function of nature ; for, next to the
necessities connected with the preservation of the in-
dividual, the most imperious is that which is subservient
to the propagation of our species ; every one feeling
proudly solicitous to exhibit proofs of his manly prow-
ess, in this mysterious and most important act of the
sexes. The emission of semen takes place towards day-
break, arising from a renewal of that general excitabi-p
lity which occurs during the first sleep ; the interval
between rendering the system more susceptible of every
additional impression ; and the debility of a sensitive
mind favouring the impression, emission succeeding
emission, the above described association is tother con-
firmed, and the difficulty of destroying the habit ren-
dered more tedious and evident, while the power and
desire of performing the natural functions are propor-
tionally impaired. The mind encroaching upon the
fHrerogative of the natural stimuli, the organs of gene-
ration, either from a morbid rapidity of action, or from
being long accustomed to obey the dictates of the im-
agination on the slightest irritation, are no longer capable
of the excitement produced on a healthy subject by the
opposite sex. As a disease of the mind called into action
by all the possible causes that produce physical and moral
irritation, the first object is, to destroy the acquired as-
sociation of ideas existing between the mental and organic
action, and to prevent the mind from recurring to its
former associations ; else the stimulating power will ex-
haust its excitability to such a degree, as to bring on
direct debility ; for the exciting power being disturbed,
ike natural functions of {he body gradually grow more
and more languid. The constitution thus gives way, as
it were, before the ravages of the disease, and exhibits
a most hopeless state of exhaustion ; all its powers are
drained, all its energies lost ; and the disease eventually
riots upon a hapless imbecility, which no physical nor
moral remedy can reach — ^an imbecility closely uiutad tft^
aad not unfrequently texmmataii^ m xc^as^ '^^a^ ^^t»s^



94 THE SILENT FRIEND*

indescribable process it is that precedes this mania, we
have no actual theory to guide us : the immediate cause
of this most obscure of all human maladies we cannot
trace, as none but the miserable sufferer can describe
the tension and pain of those hallucinations, morosities,
and burning sensibilities, that, by a gradual but certain
action, drive reason from her throne : medical inquiry is
confined to external s3rmptoms alone, and, of course,
possesses no means of following the inward progress of
the disease. Its existence is generally indicated by great
debility, listlessness, want of resolution and activity, a
great disposition to sadness, an idea of future evU, a
continual brooding on misfortune and on the errors of
life, and a long train of similar sensations, which power-
fully contribute to debilitate the general system : this effect
is manifested by the body becoming feeble and meagre,
the appetite voracious, the organs of generation so flaccid
and enJfeebled, that the slightest titillation produces erec-
tion, which is succeeded either by an emission of a
portion of the natural mucus of the glands of the urethra,
of the prostate and seminal vesicles, (but not of semen,)
and a depression of spirits, with a fear^ exhaustion a£
the frame : these S3rmptoms, by constant repetition,
become very unpleasant during the night, and a source of
constant wretchedness, so that the sufferer can rarely if
ever be seen to smile. A constant discharge of thin,
clear, slimy liquid is at last produced ; attended by that
nervous irritability, which in dehcate constitutions, lays
the foimdation of more serious consequences, and, if
it continue, will reduce the patient to the last stage of
a confirmed consimiption.

The prominent character of seminal weakness is
general, not partial debility, and principally of the ner-
vous system, although as itie disease advances, the entire
frame participates, and every organ becomes deranged
in the performance of its functions ; it is very fre-
quently combined with venereal affection, very often
accompanies gleet, and may occasionally precede it, A
seminal gleet is invariably attended by a weakness of the
whole body, loss of appetite, and a heavy pain round the
region of the bladder and the loins ; the semen comes
^wajr insensibly on coughing, gomg to «Uio\^ and the



THE SIEEKT FRIEND. 95

lightest irritation of the penis, whose erection, though
constant is feeble, the semen being easily ejected, but
without the ^^rce requisite for its expulsion in health :
the discharge is of a humid, thin and blueish cast,
slightly staining the linen.

We shall treat this disease as solely arising from the
operation of Onanism ; for here the secreting power of
the testicles is too rapid for the penis, which, wanting
a corresponding erection, scarcely participates in the act
of emission ; hence it follows, that the erection of that
member depends more^on the mind than on the secretion
of semen. ,

It is in this stage we are to consider seminal weak-
ness of a dangerous tendency ; we generally find no
particular affection of the organs of generation ; the
«emen here flows from an involuntary action ; while in
the other two, the action of friction or titillation pro-
duces the discharge.

This malady is not a disease of health and repletion,
but of ill health and depletion ; a disease \>f exhaustion
and direct debility, induced by a morbid action which
has caused a too general and permanent excitement
of the animal machine. In the former stages, copu-
lation is recommended, because Nature herself dictates
it ; but in this we have a different object to obtain ; for
here we have to supply a superabundant waste of
the semen — ^we have to replete, not deplete ; to defend
the system against the consequences of repeated ex-
haustions, caused by the imnatural loss in large quan-
tities of the most important fluid in the body, and how-
ever salutary sexual intercourse may be to a person in
perfect health, here it must be used with considerable
prudence. Sexual ability in man is a mysterious com-
pound power, requiring a perfect association in the ac-
tion of the secretory organ of the seminal secretion, and
the instrument of the ejaculation and discharge. Any
fonctional irregularity, or want of correspondence be-
tween the action of the testicles and penis, is therefore
an unquestionable state of disease ; for since both are
«o closely and intimately dependent on each other, the
least want of exactness in their adaptation may be tKe
cauae of Impotence^ WhatftN^t \» ^«i xaa^^^si^^^^^ai^sw



m



96 THE SILENT FRIEND.



this deviation &om the healthy and natural action
of the parts is first introduced ; it is not difficult to
trace its inevitable effect in the production of Seminal
Debility, and the ultimate destruction of sexual power.
Irritation, however engendered, rapidly propagates itself
along the urethra, chronic inflammation of the prostatic
and most sensitive portion of that canal is rapidly es-*
tablished, and the muscles surrounding the membrau-'
ous division of the urinary passage are sjrmpathetically
affected with irregular spasms. The irritation extends
itself by continuity of surface to the seminal vesicles,
and even to the testicles, producing in the former un-
natural evacuations, and in the latter an exaggerated
thin secretion, too rapidly poured out, and therefore
worthless, for all the purposes of generation. Among
individuals so affected, the emission (even on attempting
intercourse with the sex,) too quickly occurs, nocturnal
pollutions are frequent (indeed these are often the im-
mediate precursors of seminal weakness,) or the semen
is expelled during the evacuation of the bladder and
bowels. With some there is more or less complete ex-
tinction of venereal desire, then the erections become
few and feeble, incomplete, or absolutely null.

This condition of the sexual organs has its appropriate
general character, analogous to those which are attribu-
table to the wilful and determinate pollutions of earlier
youth : the sufferer now perhaps too late, sensibly alive
to the origin of his weakness, becomes timid, fearful,
careless of the world aroimd him, his mind abscvbed in
the consideration of his malady, until the continual pre-
sence and recurrence of the same train of painful thought
involves him in the worst form of monomania^ or rainier
the premature childishness of age All the functions
of the body languish, and are deranged, until a complete
general degradation sweeps with uncontrolled dominion
over every power and faculty both of body and soul..
The seminal fluid may dribble away without pleasure^
without erection, without the natural ejaculation, and it»
loss, when occurring in this manner, gives rise to the
same or inflnitely greater evils than those which arise
Jhmi mere sexual excess, or what is worse, from self-
poUution. There have not been vrantiiig ^oiiae writer*



THE SILENT FRIEKD. ^7

who have contended that not the semen, but only the
mucus of the canal or the prostatic fluid, furnishes the
discharge in these deplorable cases* But we know that
this is far from being a correct view of the pathology of
the disease. Mere chronic inflammation, arising £rom
conmion causes, may be accompanied with ample mucous
discharge ; but Seminal Weakness is, in the majority of
instances, the ultimate consequence of self-pollution,
which in the first instance brings about that irritability
which evinoes itself in nocturnal discharges ; and suh^
tequently in complete debility of the whole generative
system. The seminal fluid, such indeed as it is, weak,
tibin, eflete, and devoid of all fructifying agency, is un-
doubtedly the fluid which the organs sufler to escape,
and to prevent its further flow, as well as to give healfliy
tone to the secretory and retentive vessels, ought to form '
our flrst care. The shock to the nervous system, and its
repeated excitation and disturbance, are not the only
avenues to disease and powerless prostration consequent
upon the loss of semind secretion. For where the de-
bility is great, and the dribbling loss of thin semen,
draining involuntarily from irritable vessels, occurs daily,
there is progressive weakness not referrible to mere or-
gasm or voluptuous excitement. Self-pollution is a very
general source of this distressing malady. Few con«
stitutions are capable of bearing the loss of this fluid in
excess, even in a natural manner, without the probability
of inducing the same kind of debility ; but when re-
course is had to preternatural excitement, dismal is the
train of suflering which surely follows. In the early
stage of seminal weakness, diflerent persons are variously
afiected ; some are incapable of procuring a discharge
of semen into the passage of the female genitals in a
natural way, though they may effect temporary erection ;
whilst others cannot perform the act of copulation because
emission takes place too quickly, and before the requisite
fimmess of the male organ has enabled it to efiect the
necessary penetration.

Then let no illusion force your thoughts and inclina-
tions contrary to their naturid dictates ; for if, by a self-
exterminating power you annihilate the ^^et b^a^n^^
upon you by nature, in vaiu e\i«Sl •^wx ^^\a"^sii«^*^



08 THE SILEKD PRIEKD.

of that ethereal ahode prepared for those who leave the
path of error for righteousness and life. But if this
malady is still pursued (to the certain destruction of its
disciples,) celibacy should for ever separate those who
have rendered themselves unfit to be united in the bands
of affection and the ties of nature ; for in the holy state
of matrimony, where you are called upon as you shall
answer it at the dreadful day of judgment, if you
Imow " any impediment," &c. &c., what impediment
can equal that of self-insufficiency or impotence ? Per-
jury must be conmiitted ; and the unhappy partner of
your fate, whom you swear to love and cherish, becomes
linked to unfruitfulness, disappointment, and contempt-—
the bright dawn of hope becomes obscured — discontents,
jarring, and reproaches invade the heart, and what should
be a life of joy becomes a life of pain ; for without the
fond endearments of wedded life, vainly may you hope
to pass through an existence rendered happy by a reci-
procity of regard, feeling, and sensibility.

Conceive the situation of a youth so imhappily situa-
ted, when circumstances lead him to the formation of a
matrimonial connexion, and he is called upon to ex-
change his habit of filthy propensities for the pure
enjoyments of the nuptial couch ! In this case, how
forlorn is the situation of both individuals. The husband
perhaps experiencing an excitation of a new but extreme-
ly powerful description, essays to fulfil the chief end
of his union. His passions are inflamed to the highest
degree ; every faculty appears alive to a sensation of
exquisite rapture ; but alas at the moment when he is
about to unloose the virgin zone of the expecting bride,
a spontaneous emission takes place, the excitement
retires, all the lively emotions prematurely decay, and
the animal functions suddenly become palsied, and
utterly incompetent to fulfil the end for which they
were excited.

The nuptial bed, instead of teeming with hallowed,

extatic, and undefinable delight, is converted into a scene

of blended mortification, disappointment, and suppressed

anger ; and it is now that the mistaken bride is first

penetr&ted with those suspicions, which are too soon

corroborated by subsequent expexi^ce\ «iid if^ imder



THE SILENT FRIEND. 99

Bucli circumstances, the unfortunate female falls a prey
to some artM seducer, her offence is not altogether
without a justification, and the injured husband may
accuse himself as the cause of her unhappy deviation
from the paths of rectitude.

In some instances the power of the male genitals is
not altogether destroyed, nay impregnation may occur
in a healthy female, from the laborious embraces of one
whose constitutional vigour is almost entirely destroyed.
But the offspring— can it be rationally expected that
the child of such a father should be otherwise than puny,
feeble, and predisposed to those diseases which under the
most favourable circumstance destroy so large a propor-
tion of children. Instances of this deplorable description
come too frequently under the eyes of medical men :
sometimes the infant dies before the birth ; at others it
expires immediately on entering the world.

It therefore follows that there are and may be varieties
of seminal weakness, which though not absolutely pre-
cluding the performance of the sexual act, may render
that act unfruitful, or else eventuate in the production
of progeny to whom a sickly short-lived existence is
rather a curse than a blessing.

Although seminal weakness and gleet are sometimes
to be found co-existing, in one person, yet they are not
necessarily connected with each other, as we have often
found them separately. "When they do exist together,
one of the most obstinate forms of gleet is that which
arises from such a state of the parts ; for the individual
being conscious of moral turpitude, and at the same time
allured by this singular gratification, perseveres in his
bad practices, and long conceals the malady which entirely
deranges the action of the seminal vessels, gradually
exhausts his frame, and destroys every mental faculty ;
till at length the interference of relations and friends,
who are alarmed at the progress of emaciation and decay,
and his own intolerable weakness, and the anticipation
and dread of death, induce him to apply for medical
advice.

This state of disease may sometimes be the combined
effect of self-pollution and venereal infectiocL^ «!i^<sis^s^
such a state may also arise {roia \!!aft\oTi% wsc&!c»&^ ^-
bilit&tmg effects of meicury*



104 "ME fiiLEtrr PiaiEKD.

liesides, there is not any wonderftQ virtnis in abstaiiiilrr^
froni the proper use of the organs of generation. Wh'y
in the name of inorahty, were such powerful impulses
and desires bestowed upon us ? Why were such won-
derful Organizations given to us ? — ^if they were not
originally designed to be used by every one who is pos-
sessed of them ? Society, in its present form, is not
perhaps constructed with a philosophical regard to our
own natural instincts, and our original rights.

Impotence in the male, may arise then from a wide
diversity of conditions. Incapacity of erection, gener-
ally referrible to self-pollution ; — from a want of power
of retention in the seminal vessels, induced by a morbid
susceptibility of those vessels, brought about in like man-
ner by a persistance in the same vicious practice ;— ^from
inability of retention resulting from repletion of these
vessels ; — and from mental influences. Exclusive of
this, the generative infirmity under consideration, though
occasionally arising from simple disease, is ascribed in
by far the greater majority of instances to the delusive
and mentally annihilating propensity of Onanism.

Next to Self-pollution, excessive venery is a frequent
cause of impotence, as well as of sterility among the
male sex. This is a frequent cause of want of offspring
in young married persons. In these cases the semen
may escape without the aid of the ejaculatory muscles,
is imperfect in quality, devoid of procreative power until
the health is improved, or if impregnation ensue, the
child undoubtedly partakes of the debility of the parents,
and is soon to be consigned to a premature grave, the
victim of that nameless atrophy, or wasting decay, which
hurries thousands of infants annually to the tomb. In
these cases, the male parent generally suffers from in-
flammation of the seminal vesicles, or there is seminal
' weakness with more or less involuntary discharge.

We have been consulted frequently by patients, who
when performing the venereal act were subject to have
only one of the cavernous bodies of the penis in a state
of erection, the consequence being, that the penis became
incurvated on that side, constituting a disorder very
diMcult of cure, especially when resulting from an error
'in the fabric of the parts : but even vAieii\iO^AXi^c^'^«t-



T^£ SlILENT FRIEKDU 1Q5

nous bodies of the penis are turgid, and tke glans remains^
flaecid, the semen will not be then properly evacuated^
which is one of the causes of impotence : when the spongy
bodies both of the penis and urethra are rendered turgid
at the same time, the erection is then perfect. The.
human penis is very liable to incurvation, either down*
ward or to one side when it is erected ; we have known
these maladies brought on by self-pollution in youth.

When we consider the fabric of these parts, we can
thence, and from the external appearances, determine,
which disorders of these parts are curable and which are
not ; when the incurvation of the penis arises from ^
weakness in one of its cavernous bodies, at certain stages
of life it may prove an incurable case ; but if it pro-
ceed &om disorders of the glands in the urethra, or from
an erosion of the seminal vesicles, the patient need not
despair of a cure. The whole nature of a disease cannot
be known, but by experience, and by being well ac-
quainted with the fabric of the parts.

Hence appears the wisdom of Hippocrates, in saying,
''that one ties and another divides ;" and though boUi
know not what they are about, yet when nature is as-
sifited by art she completes the design of each.

Impotent persons are speedily, perfectly, and per-
manently cured by the use of the Cordial Balm of
Syxlacum, with tJie assistance of cold bathing, which
strengthens the constitution, invigorates the general
health, and favours the reproduction of the semen.

In one of the novels of Kotzebue,, there is a remark
to the following e£fect : — " That Nature in the union of
the sexes, having the multiplication of the species in
view as her principal object, never fails, whenever an
opportunity occurs, to urge them on to the accomplish-
jpient of that object.'' Be this as it may, it was the
jpoaitive command of Heaven, that Man and Woma^
'ekottld go forth, after the fall, to multiply and people the
moth ; and the proper means for that desirable end were
KiTeA to them before the command. But the All-wise
-did not fi^y here : aware that something more was re-
^uifliliQL tp uidue^ man \ot reudiet ob^di&xvs.^ ^-h^ti \^ ^^^



106 'TEE SILENT FRIEND.

Creator than a simple command, with a view to enforce
obedience to the decree, he connected ecstacy with o6e-
dience, thus subduing, by the spell of pleasure, that
natural disinclination to bend, even to the will of Pro-
vidence, which exists, even to this moment, in the
depraved mind of man.

'* Our Maker bids increase, who bids abstain
" But our destroyer, foe to God and man 7 "

Milton, Book iv.

The penalty of disobedience to this command is the loss
of that ecstatic enjoyment ; a penalty so heavy, that few
are disposed to incur it. Nature has implanted in us a
powerful disposition to perform the duty, rather than to
hazard the total loss of the delight with which it is ac-
companied ; and every feeling of the human heart re-
volts from the surrender of that moral obligation enforced
by Heaven, and the relinquishment of which must in-
evitably lead to the deprivation of so considerable a
portion of the enjoyment of life.

Sterility, or barrenness, was of old recorded among
the curses with which the Almighty punished tribes,
families, and individuals ; and although, in this ad-
vanced age of society, the case may appear somewhat
qualified in a religious sense, yet, that it is a real curse
is evident from the discontents, anxieties, and discords,
which accompany it in the married state. There is
nothing which seems to console us so ejffectually, for that
we must quit this brief and chequered state of being, as
the prospect of perpetuating our professions, names, and,
in some degree, even our lineaments. We seem thus to
triumph over oblivion ; to possess a strong guarantee
that we shall, although in our own transitory forms re-^
solved into common dust, still survive in those imaged
which have sprung from our bodies, and partake not
inconsiderably of our character, likeness, and disposition*
As we approach the confines of the grave, we feel a
greater necessity for some reliance of this sort* The
mind, as we approach the portals of death, loves to ding
more closely to the progeny in which it is to revive and
continue the scene of existence. Then it is that the
curse of sterility is felt in its full force, when the desolate
and in&rm wandeiei is tottering over the tomb, and di§*



X&^ SILENT FEI^^l). 1Q7

jBovers that there will be left behind no memorial of name
and being — then is the full affliction of a childless parent
found in the dread of an oblivion never to be broken.

In marriage, the wife relies on the hope of children,
to relieve the many tedious hours caused by the neces-
sary absence of her husband. In their presence she
looks for an ample relief from the gloom of loneliness ;
for those endearing companions, who, in more mature
life, may in some instances, become the substitutes of
her husband, and, in the event of the marriage tie being
broken by death, prove the solace and support of her
widowhood. In proportion as the female disposition
has been habituated to dwell on these anticipations, must
be th^ regret and sorrow which will ensue from a dis-
appoinnnent of hope. She cannot look for relief to those
active employments, which during many years, may
blunt the disappointment in the husband. The only
remedy she can find will be in the resources of her own
mind ; and the character and extent of these resources
depend mainly on the education and example of her
early life.

The causes of sterility in women are numerous. One
of the most frequent, however, is the existence of the
Ilia}a4y called leucorrhea, or whites. Barrenness is also
very often caused by a retention, irregularity, or profu-
rio|i of the menstrual secretion, thereby giving rise to
the diseases known by the names of chlorosis, or green
sickness, amenorrhoea, or obstructed menstruation, dys-
;menorrhea or painful and scanty menstruation, and
ine^orrhagia, or excessive menstruation and flooding.
Jt may ilso proceed from a natural frigidity of temper^
^unent or from aversion, reserve or indifference, instep
of an appetency and pleasure ; in short from an irre-*
^pondence in the feelings of the female to those of the
male.

How much domestic unhappiness is hei^ce induped.
Wjf^ scenes of dissension, sorrow, and remorse, do we
Qot fiAd to result from this indifference* How fruitful a
^urii^e is it of imfaithfalness to the marriage bed. And
whe4 it 10 acc<»np anied by sterility on the part of the

givfi ri/^ j^-^-^conireiptiBg love \d \^\x^^>— ^sw^H^as?^ "^isasi^



108 THE SILENT FRIENH.

nuptial couch a bed of thorns, instead of roses,— mai^
riage a curse rather than a blessing.

We are, indeed, aware, that by many men of high
attainment in the less enlightened period of medical
information, relief has been deemed impracticable.
But we are also perfectly aware of the possibility of a
cure in all these cases ; and that even where the disease
oj sterility appears to have taken the firmest hold of
the female constitution, assistance can be given to the
suffering patient, not through the application of transit*
ory stimulants^ to the destruction of all constitutional
vigour and ultimately of life ; nor yet by speculative
remedies, which, by changing the symptoms and ap-
pearance of disease, may induce hope, and Jead to
ardent expectations — only to destroy them in the end.
But simply by the softening, tonic, and prolific qualities
of the Cordial Balm of Syriacum, which will warm
and purify the blood and juices, increase the animal
spirits, invigorate and revive the whole animal machine^
and remove the usual impediment to fertility.

Nature has assigned to females a class of diseases
from which the other sex has been exempted, and no
care or attention will enable women entirely to escape
from their influence. From the very character and
construction of the ffemale organs, there are peculiar
crises in their lives when every solicitude is attracted to
them. And we come now to speak of a most important
period of female life, viz. : that period when the men->
strual flow, by its gradual disappearance, warns the
party of an eventful change. It is usually known aa
the turn of life, and takes place from about the 40th
to the 45th year ; though it is sometimes delayed
longer.

The diseases that spring up at this time are numer-
ous and formidable ;, and it behoves all women under-
going the change in question, to reflect seriously on
their situation. Let them not suppose, that because
many have passed through the turn of life with little
dijfficulty, it is therefore to be neglected ; for, though*
a safe conduct through it is ensured by the use of ti^e
CoRDTAL Balm of Syriacum, yet such, is the fettal^
^ect of neglect, that we are assured mote^oxGkSii%x%



THE SILENT FRIEND* 109

carried off during the period when the cessation of the
menses takes place, than at any other period of life.

At the time this fluctuating change is going on, the
constitution should be most carefidly regulated, for
the menstrual vessels do not suddenly surrender their
secretive powers, but usually a distressing irregularity
torments the patient, attended with internal pains,
sometimes actual enlargement of the womb, which
may be mistaken for pregnancy, &c. ; indeed, many
are the presumed disorders that the sufferer attaches
to herself, often unwilling to allow the important
truth ; and, it is to be lamented that habitual dropsy
is not unfrequently the penalty of concealment. Some
are afflicted with the well-known symptoms of ple-
thora, heat, flushings, restless nights, troublesome
dreams, and unequal spirits ; others are attacked with
spasmodic affections, stiffness of the limbs, swelled
ancles, piles, and other indications of plenitude. When
the menstrual discharge is about to disappear, it be-
comes irregular both in time, quantity , and quality ^
sometimes sparing, sometimes profuse. Women, how-
ever, must be sensible of the peculiar influence this
secretion has upon their frame, and we have only stren-
uously to advise them, as soon as any symptoms of
constitutional derangement shall begin to display them-
selves, to commence a course of the Cordial Balm ov
Striacum, which must be taken according to the gene->
ral directions.



0t0^m^0^i^^^^^^t^^^^^^^^^^^^9^^^^i^^*^*^i^^^^^^^^fs^%^^^^



As there may be some of our readers who may think
the descriptions given in this little work, of the gross
enormity and terrific consequences of indulging in the
vicious habit of self-pollution, have been exaggerated by
us, we shall take the liberty of adducing a few passages
from Holy Writ itself, in corroboration of the senti-
ments we have expressed. The validity of an appeal to
such an authority is irrefragible and undeniable, inas-
mtich as its truth is above impeachment, and its purity
above suspicion. Nor shall we allow ouraebre^ ta \«*
deterred from appealing to ««Le\i «. tr^xov^ Vj '^^ ^**^^
cf tie m&del. The object ive \»?i«^ ^^^^jo^e^ '^^



no THE Stl.£KT FRIEND*

Bielves in the composition of this work, is, we trust,
good ; and every legitimate means we can employ to
enhance its value, and recommend its perusal to yputh
and adults we are determined to avail ourselves of.
We all know that to different individuals, different
species of proof bring different degrees of conviction :
but in the present case, wherein we adduce observed,
established, and authenticated facts and results, an4
when we trace these facts and results by the process
of analytical reasoning, and by the laws of induction
to their causes, and when we make it manifest that
such causes are adequate to produce such and such
e&cts ; when, in addition to all this human demon-
stration, we bring to our aid the word of God himself
who neither "can deceive nor be deceived," unyield-
ing and obdurate indeed must that man be, who can
resist the combined forces of such overwelming autho-
rities ! We shall now without further apology, adduce
our proofs from Scripture of the enormity of the sm
of self-pdllution.

St* Paul in bis Epistle to the Ephesians, chap, v.,
Y. 6., says — " Let no man deceive you with vain
weirds ; for because of these things cometh the wrath
ci God upon the children of disobedience." " Keep
thyself pure," says the same apostle ; — 1 Tim. chap. v.
Y. j^2> And again : " Unto the pure all things are
pure ; but unto them that are defiled, nothing is pure ;
but even their mind and consciences are defiled."
St, PauVs first Epistle to the Thessalonians, chap,
iv., V. 3, 4, 5, and 7, — ** For this is the will of God,
0ven your sanctification that ye should abstain from
fornication. That every one of you should know how
to possess his vessel in Sfmctification and honour. Not
in the lust of concupiscence, even as the Grentiles who
know not God : for God hath not called us unto un-
cleanness, but unto holiness," Epistle to the Romamy
oh^, xiii., V. J3.— ^"Not in chambering and wanton-r
new." *^ Walk not;," s^ys he, " as other Gentile^ waJk»
^ffko being pas^ ^Hpg, have giveii theqiselves over to
Ja^c^ousnesSy to work all usncj^nness with greedines^t*'
'^J^jp^e^ians^ ck^p, iy., y. 17, 19, " Know je not, thai



THE SILENT FRIENI). Ill

take the members of Christ and make them members
of a harlot ! God forbid!'* 1 Cor, chap, iii., v. 16. —
" Know ye not that your body is the temple of the
Holy Ghost which is in you, which ye have of God,
and ye are not your own V* And in the same to the
Corinthians, chap, iii., v. 17. — ** If any man defile the
temple of God, him shall God destroy, for the temple
of God is holy, which temple ye are."

But if it had not been revealed to us that God is
highly ojffended at all manner of uncleanness, when we
reflect on the end of marriage in all countries, and in
all societies, and the manner according to which God
has ordained that our species should be continued, na«>
tural rehgion and our own reason would instruct us,
that to prevent that object must be very offensive to
God; that the crime in itself is monstrous and un-
natiiral ; in its practice filthy and odious in the ex-
treme ; its guilt is crying, and its consequences ruinous ;
it destroys conjugal affection, prevents natural inclina-
tion, and tends to extinguish the hopes of posterity.

In the foregoing pages, it has. been proved that the
hurt which either sex may receive from self-pollution,,
is corporeal as well as spiritual; because those who
have once committed this act, have in a grievous man-
ner offended God, and although many of strong con-
stitutions may for some time have been guilty of this
sin, without any perceptible harm to their bodies, yet
how to redress the spiritual injury received, shall be
our first and chiefest care. There is no Christian who
can be ignorant that no pardon can be obtained for this
as well as other sins, without repentance in general;
but many are apt to deceive themselves concerning the
nature of repentance, as not well knowing in what it
consists ; wherefore it is requisite something should be
said of the manner in which this duty ought to be per-
formed, as well as of its necessity.

The repentance of those who are polluted by this
sin, should remain with them to their lives' end. These
are not sins which a man can forget, but their memory
ought to be always fresh, that the penitent may truly
say with David, " My sins are ever before me." Not
only the time tiiat has passed smae ^^ wsossssiasassii. ^



4

1



112' ' XHB SILENT FfVIEND.

it, but even the amendment of life, does not take «lway^
the sense of so great a fafolt ^ but, on the (X)ntrary, he^
becomes more and more sensible of it. Even this
thought, that the sinner has had the happiness to obtain
the pardon of his guilt, will render the remembrance of
it the more bitter ; and the greater progress he makes
in holiness, the more abominable will his wickedness
appear. The greater experience he has of God's good-
ness, the more he will accuse and loathe himself; and
tbe more hope he has of salvation through God's good-
ness, the more will he be affected with the danger of
being excluded fipwn it, to which he had exposed
himself.

Another great duty that belongs to repentance, is
eonversicm and amendment : the guilty must forsake
their sin, and continue no longer in it. When bur
blessed Saviour pardoned the woman taken in adultery,
he said to her ** Go, and sin no more.^* The crime
must, therefore, be totally renounced ; and they who do
not this, but relapse into it, have not really repented of
it. Every act and every repetition of their sin, is an
aggravation both of their guilt and punishment.

Before concluding, we Hiink it right to mention,
that, in many instances, patients who have in early
life indulged in the habit of self-pollution, are frequent-
ly, many years after they have abandoned the pernici-
ous habit, annoyed and rendered wretched by the con-
sequences whidi it has left behind it. Such persons
are troubled with involuntary discharges, pains in the
back and limbs, and several other anomalous symptoms,
which the experienced practitioner will at once refer to
their true origin. To such persons we would earnestly
recommend an immediate recourse to the Cordial
Balic of Syriacum. The success which is to be deri-
ved from its use, is of such a nature as to insure to the
patient, a restoration to health and vigour.

It is of course, unnecessary to state, the success
of the treatment herein recommended, as well as the
celerity of the cure, are, in all cases, invariably propor-
tioned to the attention with which the directions con-
tmed in this Work are complied with.



•j^HE SIL^KT FRISKd. 118

GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS,

To be observed by those labouring under GeneratiTe
•Debility, Seminal Weakness, Impotence, Nocturnal
Emissions, or Deficiency of Natural Strength, while
under a course of the Cordial Balm of Syriacuic.

ADVICE AND PLAIN RULES FOR PATIENTS.

The first step that should be taken with regard to
tiie cure, is, to leave off those practices that have oc-
clksioned the disease, — though it may appear to be a
difficult matter, as the very soul itself is generally so
much polluted that it can dwell on no other idea.
However by a sincere repentance, and fixed detenni-
nation to desist before it is too late, there is not the
least doubt but that the irritability and tendency to
excitement may be subdued, provided the following
• rules be attended to.

Although the efficacy of the Cordial Balm of
Sf riacum is such, that in most cases no assistance is
required from any thing else, yet a due attention to
air, exercise, sleep, and regimen, is in all oases proper,
and in some absolutely necessary. A few words on
each of these heads will be sufficient.

Wherever the patient is, he must not neglect exer-
cise ; it should be moderate at first and augmented
by degrees, being always left off before a feeling of
great fatigue is experienced. All exercise is best
fasting, and with regard to the kind of exercise most
conducive to health, none is preferable to walking.
Violent or long-continued exercise of mind or body,
impairs the muscular strength, on account, it is pre-
sumed, of the dissipation of the subtle enlivening fluid.
In fact excess of all kinds is certain to be injurious.

Much depends on a due regulation of sleep, especially
as the want or disturbance of that great restorative is
one of the most distressing symptoms of the disease.
To eontaribute effectually to the cure, it should be sound
and not too long; the best way of i^xoc^axm^ ^<si^ S&
.upon a hard bed or mattx«»^ i6&m% ^«:^> \^Kca%



114 THE SILENT FRIEND*

sufficient exercise and proper food during the day,
and supping lightly. The greatest attention should be
paid by the patient both to the quantity and quality
of his food: he should rather eat a little and often,
than gorge himself with a full meal at any one time.
This rule is the more necessary as a preternatural
voracity of appetite is a frequent symptom in this and
every other species of decay. Animal food should be
taken once a day. Hot and heavy suppers are very
injurious in every way. They not only tend greatly
to disturb and disorder the functions of the stomach,
which in this complaint are rendered preternaturally
weak, but they also have a great tendency to increase
that irritability which renders the sleep broken and
unrefreshing.

Roots, as potatoes, parsnips, carrots, &c., afford
much nourislmient : and, at dinner and supper, drink
good pure water, discoloured with a little wine, or
else very good table beer, &c. Spirituous liquors in
any form are very injurious, as are also some malt
liquors. From two to three glasses of port wine or
claret may be taken, especially after or during dinner.

For weakness, deficiency of natural strength, and
relaxation of the vessels, by too frequent indulgence of
the passions, the Cordial Balm of Syriacum with
the Purifying Specific Pills, constitutes a safe,
certain, and invaluable remedy; and if, during the
time the patient is under a course of these medicines,
he were to accustom himself to the use of sponging
the whole body with cold water, every morning on
first getting out of bed, it would be highly beneficial:
it should be done quickly, and followed with a rough
towel. It has considerable effect in giving tone to
the skin, and maintaining a proper action in it, and
thus proves a safeguard to the injurious influence of
cold and sudden changes of temperature; therefore,
a person who is in the habit of thus fortifying the
skin, will be much less likely to suffer injury from
heated rooms, and the change from a hot room to the
cold air. It also exerts a peculiar influence on the
jskin itself, which in the numerous and exhausting
complaints dependant on onanism, ot \]l[i^\t ^^u^es^



THB SILENT FRIEKP^ 115

becomes rough and dry, the pores of the skin being
in an unhealthy and unnatural state, in common with
the other excretory organs of the body.

The cold bath recommends itself in a variety of
cases; and is particulary beneficial to the inhabitants
of populous cities, who indulge in voluptuousness, or
lead sedentary lives. In persons of this description
the action of the solids is always too' weak, which
induces a languid circulation, a crude indigested mass
of humours, and obstruction in the capillary vessels
and glandular system. Cpld water, from its gravity,
as well as its tonic power, is well calculated either to
obviate or remove these s3rmptoms. It accelerates the
motion of the blood, promotes the different secretions,
and gives permanent vigour to the solid§. These
important purposes are always most essentially an-
swered by sea-bathing ; salt water ought to be prefer-
red, not only on account of its superior gravity, but
likewise for its greater power of stimulating the skin,
which promotes the perspiration, and prevents the
patient firom catching cold. The warm bath occasion-
ally renders essential service by reducing the local ten-
dency to congestion and spasm. Cases however may
occur in which the water in the hip-bath should be
tepid, and sometimes even quite cold, that it may act
as a tonic and detersive to the skin, and other parts
in the neighbourhood. Cold water enemata are some-
times of service on the same principle. The general
warm bath would be injurious, by determining blood to
the brain, and causing congestion of that organ, which is
already in an irritable state.

The use of the Cordial Balm op Syriacum, and
sponging the body regularly every morning on first
getting out of bed, are pointed out by the nature of
their virtues : they produce the same effect ; and being
combined, will cure disorders which every other re-
medy would but have increased. Being strengthening,
sedative, and febrifuge, they re-invigorate, diminish
the feverish and nervous heat : they calm the irregular
motions produced by the spasmodic disposition of the
nervous system; they fortify a weak stomaiclx^ -sssjA^
quickly dissipate its attenddivt. ^i»\ ^«^ x^'^\sst55; ^a^^-

1.



116 THB SILENT FRIEND.

petite, facilitate digestion and nutrition, and promoteF;«
all the functions and particularly perspiration, whichll
renders them so efficacious. In a word, they remoTe ^h
all the disorders occasioned by weakness, provided the \
patient be not afflicted with indissoluble obstructions, M
inflammations, or internal ulcerous abscesses, which' •}
conditions aln^pst necessarily exclude the benefit of
their operation.



^^^^^^^^S^l^\^>^>^^^>^^^^^^^^^*^*^*^*^*






THE CORDIAL BALM OF SYRIACUM

Is sold in Bottles at lis, each, or four quantities at
11 5. in one large Bottle for 335., hy which one !!*•
Bottle is saved.

May be had of all Medicine Vendors in Town and
Country, the Continent of Europe, and America.

PREPARED ONLY BY

MESSRS. R. AND L. PERRY AND CO.,

CONSULTING SURGEONS,
19 BEBNEBS-STBEET, OXFOBD-STBEET, LONDON. J



Patients are requested to be as minute and exact as "
possible in the details of their cases, as to the duration
of their complaint, the symptoms, age, habits of living,
and occupation. The communication must be accom-
panied with the usual Consultation Fee of OnIb
Pound ; or a Post-office order to that amount, to ensure
its safety ; without which, no notice whatever can be
taken of their application unless £5 be remitted for a
Case, which then entitles the patient to advice without
the fee ; and in all cases the most inviolable secrecy
may be relied on.

MESSRS. PERRY & CO.,

MAY BE personally CONSULTED AT THEIR

establishment,

19, BERNERS-STREET, OXFORD-STREET,

LONDON^

punctually eeom eleven till two, and from five

till eight.

^^jd on sundays from elev^^ till o^e.



THE SILENT I




118 THE SILENT FRIEND.



GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR TAKING THE
CORDIAL BALM OF SYRIACUM.



In all cases where the CoKDiAii Balm of Syriacum
is administered, the patient should take one tablespoon-
ful half an hour before breakfast ; about eleven o'clock ;
&Ye in the evening ; and about an hour after supper ;
by itself, or in a wine-glassful of water, until health is
perfectly restored. And when the Cordial Balm of
Syriacum is taken for the cure of nervous debility,
seminal weakness, impotence, nocturnal emissions, and
deficiency of natural strength. Perry's Purifying
Specific Pills should be acfininistered also, in doses of
two Pills at night and one in the morning.

In respect to the Cordial Balm of Syriacum, it
should be understood, that its effects on the varied com-
plicated diseases, are surprising and singular, as it at
once favours the reproduction of the semen, remoyes
radically all ajffections of the generative organs Jn botk
sexes, substituting vigour for impotence, and introducing
fecundity in place of barrenness ; we therefore wish to
impress upon the minds of patients taking the same,
that perseverance is necessary, because it is not at all
uncommon for the patient to take half the quantity
necessary for a radical cure, before he perceives any ma-
terial benefit.

Some disorders have been many years in proceeding
to such a degree of malignancy, that they cannot be
eradicated in a few weeks ; in order therefore to en»-
courage steady perseverance in the use of proper means,
Messrs. Perry have adopted the plan of packing into
boxes, THREE LARGE BOTTLES, containing the
quantity of twelve at lis. for Five Pounds, by which
there is a saving of £l 128. independent of which the^
patient in entitled to the full benefit and advantage, of
Messrs. R. & L, Perry's advice, without the usual con-^
sultation fee, this rule beipg applicable only to those who
remit £5 for a packet. The ]pat\eivt is lec^ested to be



THE SILENT FRIEND. 119

as minute as possible in the detail of the case, when the
medicine will be immediately forwarded.

The £5 cases of medicine can be had only direct,
from Messrs. Perry, the most safe way of remittance
is to obtain a Post Office order for £5, made payable to
Robert and Lewis Perry, at the Post Office, 210f
Oxford-street, by which considerable delay vrill
be prevented, or, if more convenient, the money may
be enclosed in a letter, and upon payment of one
shilling at the Post Office, the same will be registered,
so that persons sending any amount will be indemnified
against loss.

Patients who correspond with Messrs. Perry, should
always preserve the same signature to prevent trouble
and delay, as the correspondence is carefully arranged
al/phahetically, and must be examined previously to any
medicine being prepared ; this is important, as reference
must be had to the former letters upon every occasion.



There is a very important observation to be made re-
specting a Public Medicine, that unless its operation be
gentle, safe, and efficacious, it must and will speedily
sink into oblivion ; and it requires the strongest con-
viction of its intrinsic worth and physical excellei-ce,
by long and great experience, to induce the inventor or
proprietor of any Medicine to incur the serious expense
of making it known by advertisements ; an expense of
no less than £20,000 annually to Messrs, Perry and Co.,
independently of £6,000 a year paid for the Govern-
ment Stamps affixed to their Medicines, an amount which
a very great and general demand only can defray ; and
which nothing short of fatuity could induce any one to
enter upon without the previous conviction of the in-
trinsic value of the medicine ; for it could be of no avail
to enter upon the task and the vast expense of making
known such remedies, if their merits would not support
their character when they were known.



THE SILENT FRIEND.



PART II.



A PRACTICAL TREATISE

ON VENEREAL AND SYPHILITIC DISEASES,

IN THEIR MILD AND MOST ALARMING FORMS,

INCLTTDING

GONORRHEA, GLEET, STRICTURE* and SECONDARY SYMPTOMS

WITH A VABIETY OF INCIDENTAL DISEASES;
AND INTERESTING

kEMARKS OCCURRING IN A MOST EXTENSIVE PRACTICE,

WITH OBSE STATIONS

ON THE ABUSE OF MERCURY.



%
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON THE

VENEREAL DISEASE.

The nature of a specific contagion, whence originate*
the disease we are now treating upon, and which has
the property of inducing, in the individual who suffers
from it, a secretion possessing the same characters and
capable of reproducing the disease in others, presents
to us on all sides, a variety of difficulties, springing
principally from the various shapes it assumes, accord-
ing to the constitution of the patient, the malignity
and virulence of the jpoison, its duration, and many
other, perhaps occult, causes. We know that it arises
^•om the absorpHon of a specific morbid poison, gen*



THE SILENT FRIEND. 121

erally imbibed during the act of coition with a person
actually infected ; and that thus produced, it is capable -
of assuming that variety of forms which it exhibits in
different constitutions, and which, depending on the
nature of the virus, and the nature of the constitution
by which that virus is received, gives rise to that
multiplicity of symptoms, which, in some constitutions
are slight and in others malignant. This pre-disposi-
tion to contagion is powerfully manifested in some
persons, while in others the power of repulsion or an
inaptitude to its imbibition is equally exhibited. How
frequently do we find, that one individual shall trans*
gress with a female labouring under the venereal
disease, yet no symptoms or evidence of infection
follow; while another less fortunate, under similar
circumstances, and perhaps even with the same female^
will have the disease shew itself in its most virulent
features ; in short it is an indisputable fact, that every
venereal case, is a case sui generis^ for in no class of
disease do we meet with cases less similar to each other,
either in regard to the period the disease takes to
develop its action, or the characters it may display;
these contrarieties appear to be greatly influenced by
the existing state of the individual systei^ at the
moment of contagion: a knowledge of these facts,
however, points out the necessity of the adoption of
an early and unequivocal line of conduct in the first
stage of our fears, so that we may not afterwards have
occasion to regret that the absence of more decided symp-
toms betrayed us into an indifference which may lead,
and has not unfrequently led, to future embarrasment
and considerable personal annoyance. We would wish
earnestly to impress on the mind of the patient, that
during the early days of infection, the disease is gener-
ally easy of eradication.

This disease may be introduced into the system
either in the natural and most common way, through
the medium of absorbent vessels, or by transplanting
a tooth of one venereally affected, into a sound per-
son. It has also been not •infrequently conveyed
by the touch alofne, especially u the finger whisk \%
bnmg^ ioto xylose proximity m^ ^^ ^^&^«&^ "^"vs^



122 THE 8ILEKT fRIEND.

Bhould happen to have an agnail, a chap, fissure, or
broken place or wound of any kind. The poison of
syphilis may and has been conveyed also by inoculation,
as is or rather has been practised with the small pox.
The diseases which it causes may be transmitted to the
offspring, and by the child communicated to the healthy
nurse by whom it is suckled. The poison has even been
conveyed into the system by means of leech bites. In
the first, it is necessary that the virus should pass
through the absorbent vessels into the blood, while in
the latter, the absorbent vessels are less necessary to
the virus being conveyed into the circulation, although
they still have a great influence in the transmission of
the disease. In the former, the disease is generally
comparatively slow in its progress, in the latter it is
rapid and violent. The infecting matter cannot act
through the medium of the air, but only through the
medium of a fluid, as it cannot be communicated, ex-
cept by the immediate contact of a sound with a
diseased, person. And although, for the most evident
reasons, it commonly appears on the genitals, particu-
larly on the delicate surface of the glans penis, &c.,
the same virus is capable of occasioning morbid appear-
ances on any other part or organ of the body.

Both sexes are equally exposed to venereal infection,
but from the different structure of the parts, the symp-
toms in the female are scarcely ever so violent as in
the male. This has been attributed to the simplicity
of structure of the female organs of generation, but we
are of opinion, that it arises more commonly either
from the natural or from the morbid flow of fluids to
those parts washing off the infected matter, and also
perhaps from greater local cleanliness.

When infection takes place, the poison is conveyed
into the system by the lymphatic or absorbent vessels.
It is in consequence of their dispersion over the whole
body, that the virus may be absorbed on any part to
which it is applied, and, by means of their infinite con-
nections, it may be diffused, often with extraordinary
rapidity through the whole system.

• The poison is absorbed more or less quickly, ac*
carding to the structure of the part to which it k



THE SILENT FRIEND* 1^8

applied, and the existing peculiarities of the constitu-
tion, health, &c., of the person exposed to its effects.

,If, for instance, from the same connexion, virus be

•lodged on any of the parts beneath the prepuce,
and upon the external skin of the penis, and if such

-virus act effectually on both of these parts, there will
be a distance of many days between the appearance of
the disease in those parts respectively ; the virus lodged
beneath the prepuce acting before that upon the ex-
ternal skin on account of its being so much thinner,
more delicate, and more vascular than the common
integument.

Like every other infectious quality causing disease,
the venereal poison undoubtedly possesses greater viru-
lence at one time than at another, and even, in certain

•intervals, may be almost quiescent, though not entirely
impaired, in its powers. There can be no doubt,
that the same circumstances attend every contagious
disease.

The infection when it has been received in the usual
way, within a certain time produces small ulcers,
termed chancres, and afterwards, by irritating and
inflaming the inguinal glands, when conveyed by the
absorbents in its passage through them to the system,
produces bubo in the groin. From external appearances,
such as chancre, bubo, or other affections of different

•parts, we are usually guided in our opinions respecting
the existence of this disease, yet the system may some-
times be affected by it, independently of the occurrence
of either of these symptoms. In such cases, the glands
of the groin are frequently more or less enlarged. By
this single mark when we have no other leading sjonp-
toms, we may, in general, ascertain whether or not
the patient be really affected with lues venerea, yet,
it may often occur without previously producing either
chancres, enlargement of these glands, or any other
external sign of disease, though afterwards, blotches
on the skin, ulcers on the tonsils, &c., will convince

■us of its actual existence in the system as a secondary
disease. Though less commonly, sensations somewhat

'Similar to rheumatism and not unfreG^ueutLy \m&t»]s&?^
hj psL^mita for ordinary Yhe\mi^\.vi ^%jbw^«wxv^ ^«sss^.



124 THE SILENT FRIEND.

affect different parts, which at length settle in one or
other of the bones either of the skull or face, or else
in the long bones as they are termed, generally the shin
bone or clavicle. These are the most common secondr-
ary symptoms, although many others occur in practice,
and are to be found described by writers on this dis-
ease. These, however, we decline enumerating, as
we wish principally to confine ourselves to the more
common and more important occurrences.

The order, then, in which the venereal S3rmptoms
generally appear, after the virus has been absorbed,
and before it has been checked, is, first, in the form
of chancre, next, bubo, then eruptions, or ulcers on
the skin, ulcers in the throat, peculiar inflammatory
affections of the eye, and affections of the bones. The
first two symptoms are not so apt to vary in the order
of their appearance as the others, which, with the
affections of the bones (which are almost always experi-
enced last, or at least in them the pains are last felt)
are extremely different in different individuals, both in
regard to time and severity.

Thus, however circumscribed the first appearance of
this disease may be, unless arrested in its progress, it
gradually proceeds to affect other parts of the body,
until at length it completely contaminates the whole
living system, and finally may even terminate existence,
having previously reduced the whole body to a com-
plete mass of ulceration and almost of putridity.

Perhaps there is no condition to which human nature
is capable of being reduced, which renders it a more
horrible spectacle, than the accimiulated evils of con-
firmed pox. We often have the misfortune to see the
once manly and elegant form reduced to a complete mass
of deformity. The eyes being tender, one or both
squinting and considerably protruded from their sockets,
vision being also more or less imperfect — the nose flat,
and the nostrils discharging foetid matter in considerable
profusion — ^the gums consumed— the teeth rotten — the
sockets exfoliating — the breath horribly foetid and dis-
gusting — the neck stiff — the joints either large and
decrepid, or absolutely rigid, and totally unfit for their
common of&ces — ulcers of the very woiat kind on. vvious



THE SILENT FRI£KD« 125

parts of the body — the bones fearfully diseased, — the
skin covered with a blotchy and noisome eruption — ^a
ghastly and haggard appearance — and the mind a com-
plete and irrecoverable wreck.

On the first appearance of this disorder in the Italian
provinces, the horrid lacerations of the human frame,
and the attendant excruciating tortures which it inflicted
upon its victims, repelled like a plague, the approach of
pity, and deterred those whom nature and affection
prompted to lend consolation and assistance. Even those
afflicted with leprosy counted themselves fortunate in
their escape from this more tremendous evil, and shim-
ned the unhappy victims of this disease as they woidd
the bite of a venomous serpent or the shaft of imerring
destruction. The poor were compelled to fly from their
habitations as soon as any symptoms of the disorder
manifested themselves, and take refuge in the abodes of
the brute creation, in dens and caverns, and trackless
forests. Physicians, friends, relations, and even parents
forsook them ; the ties of nature were rent asunder, and
every social compact was annihilated — so predominant
was the fear of infection ! In fact, the laws which were
made at that time and for many years afterwards against
persons laboring under lues venerea were atrociously
severe. Persons so afflicted, were sentenced to death if
they approached within a certain distance of any prin-
cipal town or city, and no one would render them the
slightest assistance ; so that they were left to drag out a
miserable existence for the short space of time that still
remained to them, deserted alike by friend and foe, until
at length nature ceased to struggle against the ravages
of disease ; and the approach of death, instead of being
dreaded, was welcomed, as the kindest and most happy
termination that could be anticipated in the fearful misery
under which they labored.

Many of the ancient authors give most disgusting de-
tails of the fearful appearances which the disease assumed
in different subjects, but into these evils it is unnecessary
now to enter, as the disorder is so well understood by
those practitioners who make it their whole study. It will
suffice to remark, that in many instances the s^jvK^tssss^
closely approximate to those oi Elcphautxasls \ \sv ^sJCsssix'^^



\26 THE SILENT FBIIKD*

tb those of Leprosy ; that the disorder frequently cor-^
roded the septum and bones of the nose, levelling that
knp<»'tant feature with the face, and leaving a most un-
sightly deformity in its place ; that it fed upon the lips :
sometimes destroyed the uvula : at others perforated the
palate, destroying alike the bones and the soft parts, and
completely changed the tones and properties of the voice.
The sjonptoms experienced multitudinous variations,
with change of years, many of the old ones becoming
greatly modified, and new ones developing themselves,
to the great alarm of those who groaned under their in-
fluence, as well as to the extreme perplexity of the
medical practitioners, who were yet in a state of compa-
rative ignorance with respect to the real nature of the
disease ; their endeavours to repress its tremendous rav-
ages were consequently directed rather with a view
to speculative results, than by any of those positive rules
of practice, which the industrious application of subse-
quent ages has rendered successful.

Yet, increased as is our knowledge of the nature of
this malady, and improved as is our mode of treatment, it
is by no means to be assumed that the disease has be-
come of trifling importance, or that it carries no menace
of conseqilence to the human frame ; for with all its
modifications, it is still a disorder of that subtle and
malignant disposition, that it requires to be watched at
its commencement and in its progress with sedulous
attention, and to be attacked with all the powers that
medicine has in store, as far as can be done without
putting in peril the constitution itself.

Our attention, for many years past, has been exclu-
sively directed to the treatment of venereal diseases, and
of such complaints as arise more immediately from a dis-
ordered or diseased condition of the generative system,
whether constitutional or acquired. In this statement
we must not be understood to cast the slightest imputa-
tion upon the skill of other members of our pro-
fession, in the treatment of such complaints ; on the
contrary, we mean simply to infer, that, as in all im-
portant undertakings much can be effected by a division
of labour, so it is evident that a man who confines his
studies to one class of disorders, mlYioul diNextiiv^ any



THE SILENT FRIEND. 127

portion of his attention to the more general objects of
gener^ practice, must be more intimately acquainted
with them, and with more certainty be able to remedy
them, than a man whose mind is occupied with the
study of all the various and varying diseases to. which
the frame is liable. We need no greater proof of this
* t^an the fact, that all great men who have excelled in
their profession have made some particular branch of it
their more immediate study. Hence some have excelled
in medicine, and some in surgery ; some in the diseases
of men, some more particularly in those of women, and
others in those of children. Again, many have applied
themselves to the study of certain organs of the human
frame ; hence we have one man celebrated in the treat-
ment of diseases of the brain, another in those of the
eye, ear, stomach, lungs, &c., in short, almost all the
different diseases and various organs of the body have,
at least in large cities, had their respective professors.
Perhaps if this system of the sub-division of medicid
labour and study had been more generally adopted, disease
would not only be more thoroughly imderstood, but
more especially relieved, and less frequent in its occur-
rence. Bat, of all disorders, there are none which
require more direct, distinct, and uninterrupted study
th^ those concerning the organs of generation ; and
certainly those members of the profession who direct
their attention to these complaints expressly, are the
most fit and proper to apply to for cure — so it may
reasonably be assumed on our own part, that no less can
be the result of an unwearied attention to that particular
part of study, wherein we now offer to the public the
knowledge and experience of a long and extensive
practice.

We shall now enter into details of the various forms
of this disease, with a view to render the whole subject
clear and intelligible to all degrees of human capacity.



GONORRHEA, OR CLAP.

CkHiorrhea is an inflammatory disease of the mucous
membrane of the urethra, ot \3LXVft».T^ ^i.«»3bS.^ ^-^^j^s^rs^^



128 THE SILENT FRIEND.

the contact of infectious matter during sexual intercourse*
The symptoms are a discharge of muco-purident mat-r
ter from the orifice of tiie urethra, with a sensation -of
scalding felt during the act of making water, which is
more or less severe according to the virulence of the
disease. The muco-purulent discharge which escapes
copiously from the canal possesses contagious properties^ '
that is, it can communicate during sexual congress a
similar disease to a person previously uninfected. It
cannot however reproduce the disease simply by inocula-
tion. Its action on healthy mucous membranes is caused
by its peculiar stimulating qualities. These are the first
and ordinary symptoms ; and in some cases the disease
stops here ; but in others, and indeed, in the greater
number of persons attacked, it is found to be much more
severe. The discharge increases, the pain and burning
sensation in making water become much more intense,
the penis is excited to frequent and violent involuntary
erections, particularly in the night when warm in bed,
during which state it is bent into a curve, constituting
that painful but well known condition called Chordee.

The absorbent glands in the groin sympathise with
the adjacent disturbance, and become slightly infiamed ;
but, fortunately, rarely suppurate. The swellings pro-
duced by gonorrhea, are denominated Sympathetic
Buboes.

Under certain circumstances, an inflammation of the
foreskin occurs, whether when drawn forward on the
gland of the penis, or drawn back. In the former case,
it constitutes a particular affection, designated by medi--
cal men, Phymosis, in the latter Paraphymosis.

In cases of mismanagement or carelessness, or in
consequence of a sudden suppression of the purulent
discharge, an active inflammation of one or both testicles
will arise, accompanied with much pain and swelling,
called Swelled Testicle. The inflammatory attack
in this case runs along the canal of the urethra, to the
prostatic portion, where it invades the caput gallinaginis,
extending along the common duct and the vas deferens,
to the epididymis, which is generally the seat of inflam-
mation before the body of the testicle itself becomes
affected.



THE SILENT FRIEND. 129

When the inflammation of the canal is severe, it will
sometimes happen that, at the time of making water,
owing to the rupture of some small blood-vessel in the
urethra, a quantity of blood will be voided ; but this
is rather beneficial than otherwise.

The disease sometimes extends to the bladder, in
which case that organ becomes exceedingly irritable ;
there is an almost constant desire to make water, and
occasionally ulceration is produced, in consequence of
which, a quantity of muco-purulent matter is discharged,
which mingling with the urine, gives it the appearance
of whey.

When a gonorrhea is often repeated, (and a person
who has once had the disease, is very liable to have ad-
ditional attacks) or when it has been improperly treated,
as by the imprudent use of astringent injections during
the inflammatory stage, or by intemperance in living,
strictures will ensue — the most distressing, painful, and
fatal disease the urethra is subject to, creative at all
times of a difficulty of voiding the urine, and not un-
frequently inducing a total retention, — ^in very rare cases
suppression may ensue from the incapability of voiding
the contents of the bladder. The latter frequently
becomes very much distended, and not unfrequently
loses in consequence its power of expelling the urine,
becoming subject in fact to a species of palsy from the
over-distension. In many cases it has been known to
give way, causing the pouring out of the urine into the
body, and fatal inflammation among the parts which are
subject to that irritation.

When the inflammatory symptoms attending the gon-
orrhea have been subdued, and all the bad sjrmptoms
are removed, there sometimes remains a discharge from
the urethra, of a pale yellow, greenish, or whitish colour,
unaccompanied by pain, or Scalding, or chordee, and
lasting for an indefinite time — ^for months, sometimes
for years. This discharge is called Gleet. It is also a
frequent symptpm of stricture.

Among the minor consequences of gonorrhea, we
should not omit to mention Warts. They spring up
round the gland and prepuce in gt^al Tws£Si«t%- \ssk
some huhits, they are always ixLcxease^ V^^ «a.^ ^^sXrs?^



130 THE SILEin FRIEND.

owe their origin, to want of cleanliness ; they are accord-
ingly found in all localities where that point is most
neglected.

Another unpleasant consequence of gonc^rhea, is
Excoriation, which is an eruption of small vesicles
around the corona of the gland, and between it and the
foreskin, on the fold or reduplication of skin connect-
ing them together. They break, leaving the membrane
red and excoriated — ^hence the name of the disease.
They may arise from any other irritation as well as that
of gonorrhea. In this state the membrane of the gland
and foreskin will pour out a purulent or muco-purulent
discharge ; and in some instances, where the foreskin is
tightly contracted before the gland, it assumes the ap-
pearance of a clap, and is attended in such cases with
very severe symptoms.

To the foregoing painful catalogue of sjrmptoms might
be added many others; for this dread^ malady fre-
quently puts on the appearance of other disorders, and
many unfortunate persons may labour for years under
afflictions, originating from a venereal cause, mistaking
diem for gouty or bilious affections, rheumatic pains,
palsies, convulsions, asthma, king's evil, leprosy, &c.,
all of which may arise from, or be connected with a
venereal taint ; for there is scarcely any distemper that
has put on so many different shapes, or been attended
with such a variety of symptoms ; and if proper remedies
be not timely obtained, the vital as well as the natural an-
imal functions are depraved, the body becomes emaciated
and imfit for action, and the unfortunate victim awaits
with impatience the kind messenger. Death, to put a
period to his miserable existence.

This disease has been described as one of the most
surprising phenomena in the history of medicine, whe-
ther as regards the malignant inveteracy of its symp-
toms, or the singular mode in which it is produced and
propagated. Its consequences travel out of the ordi-
nary track of bodily ailment, covering the frame with
disgusting evidences of its ruthless nature, and impreg-
nating the wholesome stream of life with mortal poison.
It conveys into families the seeds of disunion and un^
happiness, undermining domeatic Viarmoiiy) ond strik*
'^S *^ ^e very soul of human mtexcoxwc^^*



THE SILENT FRIEND. 131-

We shall now proceed to give a brief description of
the diflferent species of these diseases as they arise in
succession, with a general mode of treatment for the
same ; and we wish here to be understood, that in our
description we have confined ourselves to the essential
and most ordinary symptoms that usually appear, rather
than those that may occasionally arise.



TREATMENT OF GONORRHEA, OR CLAP, &c.

In cases of gonorrhea, or clap, gleet, strictures,
whites and all urethral discharges, irritation of the
kidneys, bladder, urethra and prostate gland, Messrs.
R. and L. Perry's Purifying Specific Pills, have
proved to be the most effectual, safe, and speedy
remedy.

As these disorders are sometimes violent, and attended
with a variety of sjrmptoms — such as buboes, ulcers,
inflammations, &c., it will be necessary for the patient
to be made acquainted with the nature of his complaint,
which may sometimes require outward applications that
may be had for a trifle from any druggist. They are
pointed out in the following General Directions.



GONORRHEA, OR CLAP.

A virulent clap is an involuntary and constant dis-
charge of corrupted mucus from the glands at the com-
mencement of the urethra in men, or from the upper
part of the vagina in women, and is caused by connex-
ion with an infected person. The quantity of the dis-
charge is in proportion to the degree of inflammation
which is present, and its quality to the malignity of the
infectious matter received in impure copulation. The
first S3rmptom of this disorder is generally uneasiness
about the parts of generation, with titiUation at the end
of the penis ; to this succeed the appearance of a little
whitish matter at the orifice of the urethra, slight
swelling, and sometimes a redness on the gland^ oi the
liead of die penis, and a tnfikk^ "^xmi^ews^ ^sa.^^ ^s^^fe-



132 THE SILEKT FRIEND.

nation of the urine. The discharge soon increases;
the inflammation at the orifice of the urethra becomes
more palpable, and extends further down the canal ; the
parts begin to bum, and the evacuation of the urine
is attended with a scalding heat which greatly torments
the parts affected ; besides which there is also a swel-
ling of the lacunce or the mouths of the internal glands
of the urethra, with a manifest and painful rigidity on
the erection of the penis. They sometimes become in-
durated, and the seat of ulcers, and may be felt exter-
nally along the passage. The discharge still becomes
more copious, grows thinner, loses its adhesiveness, and
becomes of a yellowish, or rather a greenish complex-
ion : the mouth of the penis begins to exhibit an in-
creasing redness, the passing <rf the urine is accom-
panied by excruciating pain from the irritation of the
urethra, and such general S3rmptoms of inflammation^
as to prevent the extension of the penis in erection,
curving it downwards with agonizing torture, which is
rendered still more intolerable if the member be raised
towards the belly. The torture of this situation is
greatly exaggerated by the influence of that insepara-
ble stimulus which causes frequent erections of the dis*^
eased member, especially when warm in bed, attended
with a degree of anguish which prevents sleep, or
awakens the patient, if he have been fortunate enough
to obtain a short relief from his sufferings by sleep, and
not imcommonly produces involuntary emissions of the
semen.

This is the usual type of the virulent gonorrhea,
but all the diseases of this unhappy class are of a com-
plicated and varied nature : they embrace in their
consequences so many painfril diseases, that we never
consider them, however slight in appearance, as mere
local effects, but always dread th^r approach to a con-
stitutional character ; for by a deplorable tendency, to
which limit is unknown, the most trivial cases of these
diseases, in their prolific energy, become the fruitful
mine of a thousand discordant feelings and symptoms/
that harass their devoted victim for an indefinite pe-«
rlod I therefore we strongly recommend in all cases
99. immedjlate recourse to our a.p^Ucat\OTi%»m otder tba£



TfiE SILENT FRIEND* 133

s

the remedies may be effectively employed at their onset.
In diseases of this kind, large evacuations of any kind
are to be carefully guarded against ; for in all the cases
we have seen in which they have been used, they
have done injury, by producing either irritability of
the stomach or of the bowels, and thus rendering the
system unequal to the retention of the necessary re-
medies.

The period at which the disease makes its appearance
IB generally from four to eight days after connexion :
though in this there is no certain rule ; for the symp-
toms will, with some individuals, discover themselves as
early as twenty-four hours, and in other cases, although
very rarely, not for some weeks.

The discharge in gonorrhea proceeds from the mem-
brane lining the urethra, and from the lacunae, which
are met with so numerously in the canal. In some we
find it in small quantities, attended only by slight pain,
while in others, the discharge is copious and the pain
and chordee most severe. These various circumstances
do not seem of themselves in any remarkable manner
to influence the duration of the clap. In some a slight
discharge will be easily removed in two or three days,
while in others it will, independently of the use of our
medicines, remain for several weeks. In cases too,
where the discharge happens to be very free, we find
the same uncertainty attends its removal, therefore no
time should be lost in applying for relief.

When the inflammation is very severe, the glands
immediately beneath the membrane of the urethra are
sometimes rendered completely incapable of secreting,
so that the discharge is then apparently checked. In
severe inflammation affecting the mucous membrane of
the nose or of the trachea, we find the same pheno-
mena occur, and the first sign of this violent degree of
action beginning to abate, is the return of the suppres-
sed discharges.

It has been asserted that the longer the pain and
discharge of clap continue, the further the disease ad-
vances abng the urethra, till it reaches the prostatic
part of the canal, the caput gallinaginia^ and even^ta
the bladder itself, the m\ico\i& xoento^s^ ^^ ^^i^^^cfiacf



1S4. THE SILENT FRIEND.

partake in the inflammatory action. To ascertain the
progress the disease makes along the urethra, we may
apply pressure along various parts thereof on the
under surface of the penis, and observe whether, under
such circumstances, the discharge flows in increased
quantity from its orifice.

Suppuration and ulcer occur from neglect in the
earlier stage of the disorder ; or from an improper
mode of treatment, engendering various other genital
disorders, of which mention will be hereafter made.
In fact, some medical practitioners of eminence have
laid it down that neglect and maltreatment will ma-
ture gonorrhea into genera] S3rphilis ; and that when
the original symptoms are suffered to continue, or the
infection is extremely virulent, chancres will form upon
the gland or upon the foreskin of the penis ; the mucus
increases, and is discharged in larger quantities, tinging^
the linen with a yellow or greenish stain.

The duration of gonorrhea depends much on the
constitution and regimen of the patient, but far more
on the treatment to which it is submitted. Numerous
examples have fallen under our notice of patients, who
after labouring for three or four months under this
malady, have in less than a fortnight after taking the
Purifying Specific Pills, and Cordial Balm of
Syriacum, received the most effectual relief. This
period is, in fact, amply sufficient for the cure of ten
cases out of every twelve ; and when the constitution*
has never been degraded by acquired or hereditary
injuries, health and vigour are not unusually the im-
mediate effects of a few days' care and attention.

The first stage of this disease in women, has been-
frequently mistaken by experienced persons for fluor
albus, and has been treated as such ; but the matter
discharged in that complaint is larger in quantity, gene-
rally less yellow, and of a less consistent nature, than
that which accompanies a virulent gonorrhea. Inde-
pendently of this distinction, however, a venereal infec-
tion is attended with a peculiar heat, inflammation and
pain, which are not the general concomitants of a white
flux. It is to be admitted, however, that a vitiated
cue of fluor aibus may bring on, by ^exosl mtfttcourae^



THE SILENT FRIEND. 135

a disease in men hardly to be equalled in severity, by
the most obdurate gonorrhea.

In cases of gonorrhea or clap in both sexes, the
patient must take two of Perry's Purifying Specific
Pills at night and two in the morning, and one tea
spoonful of the following mixture three times a day ;
it can be made up by any druggist : —

R, Bals. Copaib, %j.
Liq: Potas, sub-car b: ^ij,
misce probe et addt
Aq : Anisi J ij M.

Fiat Misiura cujus capiat cock, parvnm unum ter in die.



When the patient is particularly desirous for a speedy
recovery, the addition of the Cordial Balm of Syri-
ACUM, in the proportion -of one tablespoonful mixed with
each dose of the above mixture will wonderfully &cili-
tate and expedite the cure.

The bowels should be regularly acted on, but not
violently. Immersing the penis in warm water will not
only abate the sjonptoms, but also tend to keep it clean,
an object of importance, and by which much future
inconvenience may be avoided. Passing water also
with the penis immersed in a basin of warm water,
with a small quantity of laudanum in it, or some de-
coction of poppy heads will tend to relieve the distress-
ing pricking and scalding experienced in the urethra,
when micturation is practised. Excessive purging
would be very hurtful, would produce debility, and
keep up the discharge, by the local irritation it would
produce, and thus by the effort of relaxation favouring
absorption, accelerate the introduction of the contagion
into the general system.

Should symptoms of inflammation appear, the Mir-
ture ordered and the Cordial Balm of Syriacum
must be entirely discontinued until the inflammatory state
is ahated ; and the bowels must be kept open by the
following Senna mixture \ —



136 THE SILENT FRIEND.

Senna leaves .



Epsom salts
Coriander seeds
Carraway seeds



Ginger



\\ ounce,
J pound,
1 drachm,

1 drachm,

2 drachms.



Pour upon these ingredients one pint of boiling water,
and let it stand for several hours in an oven, or on the
hob of a fire-place : strain, and then add

Tincture of senna ... 4 ounces,
Sal volatile . . : . 2 drachms.

Dose — from three to four tablespoonsful every other
morning fasting.



This mixture, which loses none of its virtue by keep-
ing, if preserved in a well-stoppered bottl«, wc can
recommend as a most valuable domestic medicine.



Where the patient is late in applpng for assistance,
and symptoms of strangury, or difiiculty in making
water have appeared, the secretion passing only in drops,
with much pain, the inflammation must be subdued by
the senna mixture, before any other plan is attempted ;
which then must be taken in doses of three table-spoons-
ful every morning. When the strangury is removed by
the above means, then the plan formerly directed must
be had recourse to.

During the progress of gonorrhea, attention to
cleanliness cannot be too much recommended, by fre-
quently washing the parts with warm milk-and-water,
to prevent the acrimony of the discharge, which is apt
to irritate the skin where it touches ; to prevent this, it
may also be proper to cover the point of the penis with
a small bit of lint, to imbibe the discharge. Nor is
regimen to be considered less necessary in the cure of
gonorrhea than the other heads of treatment : every
thing which heats and stimulates the body, increases the
inflammation of the part and increases the discharge.
A mild nutritious diet must be adopted, consisting-
cbie^jr of vegetable matter, puddings and other light



THE SILENT FRIEND. 137

dishes : and when animal food is used, it should be
boiled and not partaken of freely. The drink should
consist of weak lemonade, linseed tea, barley-water, or
toast-and-water ; wine, spirits, and malt liquors being
especially avoided. The restriction of diet will be more
necessary in the first stage than afterwards : as the
symptoms of inflammation abate, the patient may in-
dulge with a little more freedom, but he should still be
cautious to avoid excess ; for no disease is so apt to
suffer from irregularities in this respect as gonorrhea.
In enforcing regimen, some regard, however, must be
paid to the habit and constitution of the person. When
the habit is delicate and nervous, the restriction recom-
mended would be apt to affect the general health, there-
fore it cannot be rigorously enforced : it must be left to
the judgment of the patient what amount of comparative
abstinence he can bear; and in these cases a due
medium will be the best rule. Sexual intercourse is
particularly prohibited.

In the progress of the disease when the discharge

HAS BECOME THIN AND WATERY AND DEVOID OF PAIN

AND INFLAMMATION, the following iujcctiou may be used :
t

Acetate of lead .... 8 grains y
Sulphate of zinc .... 5 grains,

Rose water 8 ounces,

Tincture of epium . . .1 drachm,

Mix well together ; a little to be put into a tea-cup,
from which a syringe is to be filled and injected four
times a day. In injecting, a finger should be applied
on each side the orifice of the passage, to confine the
point of the syringe, and prevent the fluid escaping ;
and after being retained a few seconds, the instrument
is to be withdrawn. The urethra should also be com-
pressed between the fore-finger and thumb of the left
hand, near the root of the penis, to prevent the injec-
tion passing beyond the seat of the disease. The effects
of the injection will shew the propriety of its use to the
patient in a few days.

When the' clap has been apparently cured, it not in-
frequently leaves behind it, iiotxi V)^e ^^i\i^\Kt «^'^'c«nr



138 THE SILENT FRIEND.

character of the inflammation, a great degree of suscep-
tibility to irritation, and a tendency to inflammation,
which may be lighted up by the most trivial cause, and
reproduce the disease in all its worst symptoms. It is
therefore advisable that the use of the medicines already
ordered should be persisted in for a considerable time
after the disease has apparently entirely ceased.



A CHORDEE

Is a spasmodic contraction of the cavernous body of the
penis and the froenum or bridle of the member, by which
the organ is bent down in the form of an arch ; as if
pulled with a cord. (See plate 7, fig. 3.)

The contraction is attended with the most excruci-
ating pain, and is most severely felt when the patient is
warm in bed. It is one of the sjrmptoms of virulent
gonorrhea, abating as the inflammation subsides, but
sometimes it will continue after the heat and other viru-
lent symptoms have disappeared,

Chordee is the result of the extension of the inflam-
mation from the urethra to the surrounding structures,
chiefly to the spongy and cavernous bodies, so that these
bodies during erection are incapable of the necessary
distension, without causing great pain by the pressure
that is exerted in inflammation on the nerves of the
parts affected. They are inflamed, tumid, and over-
loaded, and during erection, laceration of the network
substance is by no means imcommon, by which hemor-
rhage is produced, and temporary relief follows.

If it should be troublesome, the most certain remedy
i^Jtfteen drops of laudanum in a wine glassful of tvaier,
which must be taken the last thing on going to bed : it.
must not be taken for more than two or three nights
together, which will be found sufficient to remove this
pain^l and unpleasant symptom.

After the pain and inflammation are abated, the run-
ning will gradually diminish, and, when the parts have
had time to recover their natural strength, entirely dis-
appear ; the patient may then go into a cold bath every
other day. The penis may now be ke^t clean with




. ;'•■"*-• ^^



■■•J ••»

^■# ■.■*




^■^i**"




MO THE SILENT FRIEND.

running, riding or walking too briskly, or by cold
bathing while a clap continues, especially if it be very
severe : or by exposing the private parts to cold more
than necessary, or by drinking stimulating liquor;
sometimes by strong purges. (See plate 7, fig. 4.)

When pain is first felt in the testicle, and when
the epididymis begins to swell, the discharge from
the urethra usually abates or entirely ceases, i.nd the
inflammation in the testicle proceeds. A most exqui-
sitely sensible pain is felt in the epididymis, particularly
on its being touched, and it becomes hard. In some
the testicle does not begin to swell till after the epidi-
dymis has become enlarged. The pain is then most
intense, even when the testicle is at perfect rest, pro-
bably owing to the non-distensibility of the tunica al-
buginea, with which the testicle is invested. Although
the scrotum seems enlarged upon the swelling of these
bodies, yet it but seldom partakes in any great degree
of active inflammation. After the swelling commences,
the spermatic cord not unfrequently becomes similarly
affected, and is also the seat of very great pain. The
whole course of the cord is sometimes morbidly af-
fected, and the pain is felt in the loins, and about the
region of the kidneys. The patient is at length dis-
tressed with a continual gnawing pain in his back, and
febrile symptoms affect liim.

This symptom is a very frequent attendant on gonor-
rhea, particularly when severe bodily exercise, irre-
gularity of living, or excess, have been indulged in>
too strong, and irritating injections used, or the too
liberal application of the bougie has been had recourse
to. In some very irritable habits, from the commence-
ment of gonorrhea, even moderate walking will oc-
casion a swelled testicle. It is not so conunon for both,
testicles to swell at once, as for one to be first affected,
and when it begins to recover, the other to be affected,
and, in this way, unless under proper management, the
disease is often protracted for several weeks.

A little attention may, on almost every occasion,

prevent this symptom. Indeed, that it ever occurs, is

perhaps more owing to inattention or bad treatment,

than exclusively to the nature of the disease. On its



THE SILENT ^RIENB. 14i

first approach, the patient feels as if the testicle affected
■was, from time to time, in a state of slight motion, but
this soon gives place to dull, heavy, burdensome pain,
to which is soon added twitching darting sensations.
It gradually, sometimes quickly, increases in size, and a
throbbing sensation is felt in it, so that its suspension
by a bandage becomes necessary.

This symptom, unless from improper treatment, sel-
dom remains ; but when the discharge entirely ceases,
before the swelling has subsided, it often continues in
the some condition for years, and sometimes for life.
Permanent swelling of these glands, however, is more
apt to be induced by causes, (such as external violence,
&c.,) which do not occasion a discharge from the ure-
thra, and those swellings very frequently continue for
life.

It being the most painful and dangerous symptom at-
tending the disease, the greatest care should be ob-
served to remove it. The testicles should be supported
or- bound up with a linen truss or bandage ; if the
patient is of full habit of body, bleeding will be pro-
per ; the diet in this case should be as low as possible.
No exercise whatever should be used, even sitting up
is hurtful ; it will be requisite to lie down as much as
possible. The following fomentation will be requisite : —

Take of extract of lead a tablespoonfulj vinegar four
tablespoonsful, water a quart : shake them together and
foment (as warm as the patient can bear with ease) the
swelled parts with flannel frequently for some time to-
gether: after each time of fomenting, apply a warm
poultice of bread and milk under the whole private
parts, and take the Pills regularly. Should the swel-
ling not go down, it will be then proper to apply eight
or ten leeches to the testicles, and repeat them for two
or three days ; the Joinentatwns being freely applied
after the leeches have fallen off.

If the patient in a previous gonorrhea has been
troubled with this symptom, he should not neglect to
keep the testicles supported while the clap continues, as
the swelling is apt to return. If he cannot conveniently
procure a linen truss, a slip of linen or handkerchieC
may be- tied round the waist, and «xkO>i}s:w&t ^s^twi^J5^.^s^--



Ii9 .THE 8IX.BNT fBISND.

denieath, «o as to support it. Swelling of the testiclai
is most apt to occur rather late, about the second or
third week of a neglected gonorrhea.



BUBOES OF SWELLING IN THE GROIN,

-Occurring during the progress of gonorrhea, may be
dispersed by rubbing well the size of a horse-bean, or
half the size of a nut meg, of strong mercurial oint-
ment, into the thigh, \mder the bubo four times a day,
and taking the Pueifying Specific Fills, two every
night and two in the morning. They rarely suppurate.
(See plate 6, fig. 2.)

GLEET.

A morbid or diseased excitement of the urethra may
induce gleet, which consists in a discharge of mucous
fluid from the urethra, attendeded with very little, if
jmy pain. When the discharge' owes its origin to causes
which have no connexion with venereal disease, we dis-
tinguish it by the name of constitutional gleet, as will
be subsequently shown. It is, however, more com-
monly a disease dependant on an ill-cured gonorrhoea,
or is a sequence of that disorder, having lost its irrita-
ble malignity, becoming simple in its appearance, but of
alarming consequence in its duration, because it may
and does often induce seminal weakness and several
other complaints ; it is especially dangerous as being
auxiliary to the formation of stricture of the urethra, a
.distressing complaint. The contagious properties whic^
characterized the discharge of gonorrhea are still pre-
Sifiikt in that of gleet, but are not quite so prominent.

Gleet will remain a chroniCf or continual disease, for
weeks, months, nay even years ; and under the changes
incident to habit and regimen, the symptoms will vary
in severity, a circumstance which has not unfrequently
led medical men into the error of supposing such
changes to arise from fresh infection: in these cases
the patient has over and over again submitted to the
j^CHifipe qi fybanoAceutical dQubt« and not until bis



.1 ■ . - I



I.




tllceratfd punluJri ini rhe ^v-iyiOuii. Oui/fi.




k



• THfi SILENT FRIEND. 143

' painful anxiety has become insupportable, has an appeal
to further assistance extricated him from error, anguish,
and uncertainty.

The discharge in gleet, however, is very much regu-
lated by the habit and diet of the patient ; if he is
accustomed to indulge freely in the luxuries of the table
and bottle, or in violent exercise, it will be increased
both in quantity and acrimony ; while on the other
hand temperance and regularity of diet and exercise
will materially assist the effects of our medicines, by
gradually diminishing the discharge and ultimately
relieving the patient of his long continued torment.
Premature death has been the consequence of a neglect-
ed gleet ; for it is a reasonable inference that the
constant waste will exhaust and lead to an untimely
extinction of the bodily faculties.

The secretion of true gleet is almost watery, com-
bined with the mucus of the healthy portion of the
urethra, but it will vary according to the excitement to
^vHiich the parts are subjected. It may occasionally be
accompanied with slight pain on making water, or
during erection, but not necessarily so ; and of course
the more acute the symptoms, the nearer the approach
to the puriform discharge, which characterises the go-
norrheal disease in which it originates. If dependent
on the existence of stricture, the connexion may be
inferred previously to any examination of the canal,
from the thin and ichorous nature of thedischarge, and
from its being forced away by any muscular effort, as,
for instance, during the evacuation of the bowels.

There is, obviously, no distinct boundary which points
to the cessation of gonorrhea, and its terihination in
gleet ; the change is often so gradual as to be imper-
ceptible. If there be no narrowing of the urinary
canal, if gleet appear to be the mere chronic subsidence
of gonorrheal iriflammation, then the judicious employ-
ment of astringent or slightly stimulant injections will,
be useful and necessary.

The patient should abstain from all vegetables, acid,
and sugar ; he should rise early in the morning, take
gentle exercise, use the cold bath, first i5luxv^\s.%vci \!siR.
vKater over head and conVng- cftxt* \t£itcka^^\j^'^ % ^^j^ms^



144 THE SILENT FBXEN0^

taking a second dip or remaining one moment in Hke
water. The penis and testicles should be frequently
washed in cold water.

Take half a tea spoonful of the mixture ordered for
clap, mipeed with one table spoonful of the Cordial
Balm of Syriacum at least four times a day, using the
following injection, and taking one of the Purifying
Specific Pills three times a day^ till health is perfectly
restored.

Obtain a syringe, and inject up the urinary paseage
the following injection three or four times a day :

Sulphate of Zinc ten grains, Rose Water four ounces,
mixed together.

If this should cause any pain in the passage, it must
be diluted with a little water.



MUCOUS GLEET.

This usually arises from causes independant of gO"
norrhea, and is characterised by peculiar symptoms,—
the subject does not, therefore, fall under consideratio9
in this part of the work, but may be foimd discussed
in the first part " On Onanism, or Self Pollution."
which treats on a variety of disorders arising from
nervous debility and seminal weakness, which lead t<^
the compromise, if not to the extinction, of sexual power :
in these important and particular cases Messrs. Pe&ey
advise a personal interview, and as the facilities of
communication with every part of the United Kingdom
are so great, distance itself can now scarcely constitute
an obstacle.



GONORRHEAL OPHTHALMIA, and CORYZA.

There can be no question, that ophthalmia, arising du-
ring an attack of gonorrhea^ is, in every instance, pro-
duced by the matter being directly applied to the eyes,
and not from metastasis of the disease, as has been ridi-
culously asserted. Patients are too often very careless
of these matters. They ought at all times, immediateljr



THE 8II.SNT VEIEN9. 145

■after toojching the affected parts, to wash their hands
with soap and water ; and never use the same cloths or
sponges for the organs of generation, and the eyes,
nose, etc.

Gonorrheal ophthalmia is certainly one of the most
acute, inflammatory, painful, and destructive affections
which, perhaps, occurs in the whole range either of the
practice of physic or surgery. No acute disease can
equal it for rapidity, torture, and destruction. It not
unfrequently, if not treated very early in the attack,
absolutely in the onset, will destroy the eyes, so as to
render them totally useless as organs of vision in three
or four days.

The disease commences with a slight degree of red-
ness of the membrane lining the eyelids, which soon
extends to the eye itself, the conjunctiva becoming
swollen and very red, so as to overlap the cornea aod
compress it greatly. The eyelids are tumefied, so as to
render it difficult to separate them, and every part of
the membrane pours out a highly contagious discharge,
a single drop of which is sufficient to produce the dis-
ease in another person, if applied to the eye. The
constitutional symptoms make equal progress ; fever
runs high, and the patient is in a state of great bodily
and mental excitement. In this disease early application
for surgical assistance is indispensably necessary.

A similar state of things may affect the nose ; the dis**
ease is then known by the name of gonorrheal coryza.
Both the complaints are well represented in plate 12,
fig. 2.



STRICTURE.

Stricture is a disease that obstructs the free passage
of the urine, and causes it either to come in a small
forked or twisted stream, or drop by drop, with consi»>
derable pain : if the urethral canal be not much dimin-
ished in calibre by the stricture, it may exist many
years without producing any great degree of incon-
venience ; but though this may be the case respecting
the evacuation of the urine, we wce'W^XA ^^x^^sci^'^&iai^



146 THE SILENT FRIEN&.

tlie semen, in consequence, in the action of coition naay
not properly be directed into tlie vagina *, for not isstt-
ing at the moment of ejaculation from the urethra, it
afterwards falls merely by the effects of its specifiie
gravity : of course attention to this stage of the disease
becomes requisite ; and more particularly in the ad^
vanced period of life, as the power by which the urine
is evacuated, and the semen ejected necessarily becomes
weaker.

Although stricture may arise from constitutional
causes, from malformation or spasm, or from other ac^-
cidental circumstances, the cure of which must depend
upon minute reference to the particular cause, yet the
source of this distressing complaint, in nineteen cases
out of twenty, is to be traced to venereal disease, or td
an improper method of treating gonorrhea. We may
look upon the inflammation of gonorrhea, (after it hat
continued a long time,) as producing a new action in
the vessels of the urethra at a particular point, by
which a sort of membranous band is formed round the
internal urethra, the circle of which being hard, and
situated within the natural space is denominated a
stricture. It may be considered that the urethra be-
ing hollow, muscular, and membranous, and naturally
predisposed to contraction, is readily affected by inflam-
mation or violence of any kind; but the progress of
stricture is variable in different habits. Tropical cli-
mate, sedentary pursuits, excessive indulgence in — or
unnaturally protracted — sexual intercourse, are some-*
times the causes of stricture ; and in irritable habita
will excite the disease, without the intervention of any
venereal complaint.

Spasmodic stricture is generally seated at the neck
of the bladder or on the membranous part of the ure-
thra. It may occur to persons in good health from
exposure to wet and cold, from derangement of the
organs of digestion, from long retention of urine, par-
ticularly when walking (owing to the absence of public
urinals,) or to violent horse exercise : but more fre*
quently does it happen to those young men, who, when.
^uflTering from gleet or gonorrhea imperfectly or only
^ pAitidly cured, are tempted to coiamit axv %^Qe«s in-
—ine, spiiitSf and other strong dTVxv\LS. ^\axawxAe^\T[:



THJi illLENT FEIENOU 147

|(mal society, glassful after glassful is swallowed, each
one to be the last. The patient, with his bladder full
to repletion, scarcely able to retain his water, jetf
probably ** going *^ every moment, represses his desire
until the party breaks up, when, on encountering the
cold air he finds himself unable to void even a drop,
or if so only with extreme difficulty. The greater the
effort and the more determined the straining, the
greater is the impossibility; and unless relief be
speedily afforded, the most alarming consequences
may ensue.

Notwithstanding the danger attendant upon a neg^
lected or severe case of spasmodic stricture, when
judiciously treated none need be apprehended. The
patient should instantly send for a surgeon to draw
off the urine — there will seldom be any difficulty in
passing the catheter, especially if the operator be not
too hasty, and be at all dexterous in the use of hk
instrument. Force should never be employed: but
as this devolves on the surgeon, the patient need be
under no apprehension ; a constant use of the CoE*-
DiAL Balm of Syriacum and Purifying Specific
Pills, for a few weeks subsequently, will remove this
unpleasant disorder.

The formation of a permanent stricture has beei;i
attributed to various causes ; most of these have been
already enumerated ; there is one however not yet
mentioned, which is popularly but erroneously con-
sidered to be a most efficient cause^— namely, the use
of astringent injections in the treatment of gonorrhea
and gleet. The origin of this opinion may be readily
traced to the fact that permanent stricture invariably
depends on the results of inflammation in the deposi-
tion of lymph in the cellular tissue surrounding that
part of the urethra where the contraction is found, and
as gonorrhea is in itself a pecidiar form of inflam-
mation, from which persons labouring under stricture
have generally previously suffered, and as generally the
disease has been neglected, injections being had re-
course to ultimately to remove a long standing effect,
persons have been apt to attribute to the remedy, that
which is in reality only due tjo \Sck<& QqA^as^ iQi(.^«^si^^
the remedj was used.



148 THE SILENT FRIEND.

Permanent stricture is characterised by a difficulty
which is constantly experienced in the discharge of the
urine, which comes away at first in a stream dimin-
ished in size, then forked or twisted, something like a
corkscrew in shape, and afterwards, as the disease
becomes more severe and the stricture more contracted,
it is discharged only by a few drops at a time, and
that too with excessive pain and difficulty. Occasion-
ally the presence of a stricture is attended with a
constant dribbling away of the urine, which apparently
nothing can prevent. The canal of the urethra is the
seat of considerable irritation, and a gleety discharge is
generally met with. There may be one, two, or more
strictures in the course of the canal, and sometimes the
third lobe of the prostate becomes enlarged, the disease
having extended nearly to the bladder.

If the stricture be allowed to continue unchecked,
the canal of the urethra vnll enlarge behind it ; forming
a sinus in ^hich the urine collects, and exciting inflamma-
tion and ulceration ; the urethra itself finally bursts,
allowing the urine to escape into the pelvis and the
cellular tissue of the perineum, where it causes great
inflammation, abscesses, and even gangrene. All this
while the disease is attended with considerable fever,
and the patient's life is. placed in great jeopardy. Nor
does the bladder escape ; subacute inflammation of its
mucous membrane is set up — a mucous glairy secre-
tion is poured forth in great quantity, the urine becomes
ammoniacal, and offensive, and the kidneys soon partake
in the disorder, becoming the seat of inflammation,
with dilatation of their tubes and pelves, and ulti-
mately suppuration sets in, which in a period more
or less prolonged, according to the intensity of the
disease, and the state of constitution of the patient,
terminates the existence of the unfortunate sufferer.

In the treatment of this severe disease, constitutional
remedies must be employed, and surgical applications
also had recourse to. The use of the bougie is indis-
pensably necessary — in addition to which balsam*
medicines must be given internally, conjoined with the
same plan of proceeding recommended in cases of spas-
modic atrictme. (See plates, B axvd ^.^



31



I




THE SILENT FRIEKD. 14&

INCIDENTAL DISEASES.

There are many other complaints to which the
urinary as well as generative parts are subject, viz,
fistula. Disease of the Prostate Gland, and some
other affections of the Testicle, Bladder, Sfc: but as
to enumerate them would only be to swell these pages,
we have contented ourselves with mentioning those
only which are most important, and of most general
occurrence. If, however, the patient should find any
symptoms of disorder not previously or hereafter
enumerated, he should, without delay, describe mi-
nutely the symptoms, referring them (as far as he is
competent) to the proper sources ; no time should in
any case be lost, as changes go on very rapidly, and
the views of a just practitioner being always directed
to the protection of nature, he should have an oppor-
tunity of preventing the intrusion of disease upon one
of her most important systems.

When the organs of generation are infested with
pediculi or crab-lice, the most efficacious and agree-
able remedy is the application of strong mercurial
ointment, which must be well rubbed on the parts.
Such a practice is seldom ineffectual ; even powdering
them with calomel, will at once destroy the insect,
and thereby remove the itching. The Purifying
Specific Pills, and Cordial Balm of Syriacum,
should be taken according to the * General Directions ; '
two Purifying Specific Pills at night and one in the
morning, and one tablespoonful of the Balm of Syria-
cum four times a day, and continued for some time
in order to purify the blood.

VENEREAL CONTAMINATION

If not at first eradicated will often remain secretly
lurking in the system for years, and, although for a
while undiscovered, at length break out upon the
unhappy sufferer in its most dreadful forms, or else
unseen internally endanger the very vital organs of
existence.



fBO Tti-E SILENT FRIEND.

To those who are suffering from the consequences
which this disease may have left behind it in the
s3rsteni in the form of secondary symptoms, erup

TIONS OF THE SKIN, SCURVY, SCROFULA, BLOTCHES ONTHB
HEAD AND FACE, VENEREAL ULCERATIONS, AND ENLARGE.
MBNT OF THE THROAT AND TONSILS, NODES ON THE SHIN
BONES, THREATENED DESTRUCTION OF THE NOSE AND
PALATE, OR ANY OF THOSE PAINFUL AFFECTIONS ARISING
FROM THE INDISCRIMINATE USE OF MERCURY,

MESSRS. PERRY'S CONCENTRATED
DETERSIVE ZlSSENCE,

AN ANTI-SYPHILITIC REMEDY,

Is strongly recommended ; its use will be found to be
attended with the most astonishing effects ; it clean-
ses the blood, and searching out and removing the
impurities by which it is contaminated, checks the
ravages of the disorder, and effectually re-establishes
and re-invigorates the health of the constitution.



Price 11 5. or four Bottles in one for 335. by which lis*
will be saved f also in £5. cases, which saves £l, \2s.

Independent of which the patient is entitled to the Jtdl benefit and
advantage of securing Messrs. R. S[ L, Perry^s advice, imthout the
usual consultation fee, this being applicable only to those who remit
£5, for a packet. The patient is requested to be o« minute as pos-
sible in the description of the case, when the medicines will be tfn-
mediaiely forwarded.

PREPARED ONLY BY

MESSRS. R. AND L. PERRY AND CO.,

SURGEONS,

19 BERNERS STREET, OXFORD STREET,

LONDON.

Observe the signature impressed in a stamp on the outside of each wrap-
per, and the name and address of the proprietors blown in each bottle.

May be had of all Patent Medicine Vendors in Town and Country
throughout the United Kingdom, the Continent of Europe and America.



THS SILENT FRIEND. 151



GENERAL DIRECTIONS

FOR TAKING THE

CONCENTRATED DETERSIVE ESSENCE.



Three tea-spoonsful to be taken three times a day,
in a little cold water, and in urgent cases the dose
may be increased to four tea-spoonsful three times a
day ; if it should operate much by stool, the dose must
be lessened, or it should be taken less frequently.



During the use of this medicine, if the patient catch
cold, a tenderness of the mouth and gums will some-
times happen ; this may be removed by taking a
tea-spoonful of flour of brimstone, mixed with treacle,
night and morning, till the mouth is cured ; or else,
a dose of salts, or twenty grains of jalap, may be taken
night and morning, while the tenderness of the mouth
continues. If the patient at this period be rubbing
in any ointment, its use must also be discontinued;
when the mouth and gums are well, the Concentra-
ted Detersive Essence must be again taken, and the
use of the brimstone abandoned.



152 THE SILENT FRIEND.



IMPORTANT OBSERVATIONS

ON THE USE OF

THE CONCENTRATED DETERSIVE ESSENCE.



THIS MEDICINE, FROM ITS PECULIAR PROPERTIES,

18

SUFFICIENT TO EFFECT A PERFECT CURE

OF THB MOST

INVETERATE AND OBSTINATE FORMS

OF

THE VENEREAL DISEASE,

Its active principles are transmitted by the medium of the circulating
fluid throughout the entire fiame, and even penetrate the more minute
vessels, removing and expelling in its course all corruptions and impuri-
ties from the vital stream, so as altogether to eradicate tne virus of disease,
and expel it with the insensible perspiration through the medium of the
pores of the skin and mrine.



SECONDARY SYMPTOMS,
CHANCRES, BUBOES, VENEREAL SORES OF EVERY DES-
CRIPTION, SORE THROAT, SCURVY, OLD WOUNDS,
ULCERS, SORE LEGS, SCORBUTIC OR SCROFULOUS HUMORS,
ERYSIPILAS, FISTULA OR PILES, LEPROSY,
ERUPTIONS ON THE LIPS, HEAD, AND FACE,
AND ALL OTHER CUTANEOUS ERUPTIONS ARE UNDER

ITS IMMEDIATE INFLUENCE.



In all cases, The Cordial Balm of Syriaeum should
be used for some time after the cure has taken place,
in order to cleanse, strengthen, and renovate the sys-
tem from the natural debility and consequences attend-
ing affections of the above description.






/'



oS=



m



^



""•'■'■■' .-/".- «™



>• 1



.- • I






('•



c^ :]••:■ I.. '



-I . . • ,



. I )



i:.--



..■ .'V.



♦ .



% I

*> '-.v. I.



• ■ ( « .



".<•



. ■ ! 1 ; ... f

* ;■ i ■ ■ ■

•'II . -.-i- •> :
■■ t iU , ■■



':■•. »'\i..-'^'



71



THE SILENT FRIEND. 153



SYPHILIS OR POX, AND SECONDARY

SYMPTOMS.

Syphilis or Pox is another and more violent form of
the Venereal Disease, and is divided into two forms,
the primary and secondary. The former consists of a
chancre or ulcer, which forms on the foreskin and gland
of the penis, of an irritated and red appearance, which
graduaUy spreads, and if not speedily arrested, ends in
the total destruction of the penis. After the disease
has appeared in the form of a chancre, in a few days
a buho or abscess of the groin foUows, which inflames,
enlarges, suppurates and bursts, when a quantity of
matter escapes. In severe cases, instances have occur-
red where the abscess has extended to deep parts and
exposed the femoral artery, which has ulcerated, and the
patient, from want of timely assistance, has bled to
death. The constitution ultimately becomes affected,
and hence arises what are called secondary symptoms,
which at first affect the nose and throat, secon^y the
sJcin and the surface of the body, and lastly the bones. —
(See plate 10, fig. 1.)

When the venereal virus attacks the throat or palate,
the membrane of the roof of the mouth becomes red
and inflamed, a pimple forms upon it, which opens, ul-
cerates, and exposes the bony palate, which may be
felt by the probe : this is the first stage. The exposed
bone soon exfoliates, and a commimication is thereby
formed between the mouth and nose, and fluids return
through it, the voice being changed into a nasal twang
and a most offensive discharge secreted.

When the tonsils are attacked, ulcers appear precisely
similar in character to chancres — ^hoUow in the centre,
with raised ragged edges, yellow on the surface, with a
livid colour on the surroimding margin. A sense of
dr3mess is perceived extending up the Eustachian tube
to the ear, and the patient occasionally becomes deaf,
by the extension of the disease to the t\ib^^> «s\.^^^
T&vagea which it there coixumta. ^of^A^atx^^^ ^^ \Ks&^ck&



154 THB SILENT FRIEND.

is attacked. Extending its course, it next attacks the
larjmix, or the top of the windpipe, when if not ar-
rested it will soon destroy life. Attending the affec-
tion of the larynx, there is always loss of voice ; the
patient speaks in a low whisper. It is more &tal than
any other form of the venereal disease.

The mucous membrane of the nose stands next in
order, as subject to the influence of Syphihs. The
patient's attention is first directed to it by an incrusta-
tion which forms on the nostril. On this being re-
moved, a quantity of blood mixed with purulent mat-
ter is discharged, which frequently lays bare the bone»
and occasions it to exfoliate, and horrible deformity i&
the result ; this is illustrated % the Plate (No. 10, fig.
2,) recently drawn from a case under the care of
Messrs. Pbrrt.

CHANCRES, OR ULCERS.

The flrst appearance of syphilis is commonly in the
form of a chancre on the gland of the peniSf or on the
foreskin, in men — and in the labia pudendif or nymphcs^
in women. It will appear in otiier parts, however,
as the back of the penis, and on the scrotum in men ;
and the perineum of women will sometimes be the
seat of the disease — (See plate 6, fig. 1.)

The precursor of chancre is a slight inflammation^
followed by a little pimple ; this gradually exposes a.
small pustule, the fluid in which is first transparent,
then white ; it breaks, and a small but spreading ulcer
is formed, sometipies painful — generally sore ; it has
hard protuberent ash-colour edges, covered with a white
slough, and is diflicult of cure. It seldom happens
that there is more than one chancre, although instances
occur where there are two, three, or four — (See plate 7,
fig. 5.)

When a chancre or sore is perceived on the yard,
the Concentrated Detersive Essence must be taken
in doses of three tea-spoonsful three times a day, in a
little pure cold water, and when they are healed, the
Cordial Balm of Syriacum should be taken accor-
ding to the General Directions for at least one month.
Ji will he proper to dress the daaxvci^^ thtee limes «.



THE SILENT FRIEND. 155

day with the following wash, which may be prepared
at any druggist's : —

Calomel .... 1 scruple,
Lime-water . . .3 ounces. Mix,

Always before the sores are dressed, the matter must
be wiped clean off with a bit of lint, the ulcer being
afterwards washed with warm water ; dip the whole
penis in a basin of water for a minute, then take off
the moisture with a piece of linen rag, and apply the
black wash on a piece of linen or lint, to be kept wet-
ted as much as possible.

Where at the expiration of a week, the chancre
neither recedes nor advances, discontinue the hUick
wash, and use the blue wash as underneath : should the
pain be very great in applying it, it may be diluted
with a little water : —

Sulphate of Copper . . 3 grains^
Camphor . . . .3 grains^
Destilled Water . . .1 ounce.

Mix and strain.

When the chancre is situated under the prepuce,
or foreskin, and the latter covering is so inflamed and
swollen as to prevent its being drawn back to exhibit
the sore, the discharge should be carefully washed
out by any of the lotions already recommended, by
means of a syringe, several times in the twenty-four
hours. Much good is often done by varying the local
remedies, occasionally filling up the ulcer with blue oint"
mentf or in fact any substance which will alter the mor-
bid action of the parts ; but, as a general rule, these Ic-
tiona will be found sufficient if their use be duly per-
severed in.

If a Bubo should not have risen much, it may be
dispersed by rubbing into the thickest part of the thigh,
under the bubo, the size of a large horsebean of the
following ointment, for ten or fifteen minutes ever
night and morning: the Concentrated Detersive
Essence being taken reguiaily fot ^ lotXxAi^ ^^ Ss» ^



156 THE SILENT FRIEN0*

longer time, according to the directions previously given
after it is dispersed : —

Of strong mercurial ointment half an ounccy extract
of lead thirty drops, mix them well together.

If it should not decrease by this method, let it come
to a head by discontinuing the ointment. A warm
poultice of bread and milk applied two or three times
a day, will tend to hasten the suppuration, and produce
ease. When it is sufficiently ripe, it will burst of itself :.
then gently press out the matter, and endeavour to en-
large the orifice by distending the skin, put a warm
poultice over it, or foment it with warm water, and apply
a little mercurial ointment, spread on lint, to the open-
ing twice a day. Always before it is dressed, press the
matter out with great care and gentleness, and wipe it
very clean. The same poultice must never he used hut
once in any case. The poultice need only be used for
a few days after it bursts ; or, if it be not convenient
to apply poultices, four or five folds of clean linen may
be put over in its stead, first applying the ointment-
If proud flesh sprout up, a little red precipitate
mixed with the ointment will consume it. After it has
been open about a fortnight a little of the ointment
ordered to disperse the swelling may be used to heal it.
The Concentrated Detersive Essence must be
taken during the time as follows ; three tea-spoonsful
three times a day, in a little pure water, and should this
not relieve the symptoms quickly, the dose must be in-
creased to four tea-spoonsful three times a day. The
patient has only to follow the directions and take the
Essence, and he may rely on obtaining a perfect re-
storation to health, as it has never been known to
fail in eflfecting a cure, however severe the symptoms
maybe

After the bubo has discharged its contents, the

strength should be supported, an improved diet allowed^

port or other wines may be taken, and the Cordial

Balm op Sykiacum, taken regularly in doses of one

/adU'S^on/ul four times a day^



THE SILENT FRIEND. 157

WARTS.

A wart may be very properly considered a disease of
the papillae of the skin, covered with a diseased cuticle,
commonly of a cylindrical shape. It appears on the
foreskin and gland of the penis, in 7nen ; on the labia
pudendi, in the angle between the labia and the inner
part of the thigh, and about the perineum in women,
and also about the anus in both sexes.

Warts follow chancres, and sometimes gonorrhea, but
frequently appear without local symptoms : the injudi-
cious use of violent remedies often produces ulceration,
and sometimes malignant growths.

The rvarts should he frequently smeared with a feather
or hair pencil^ with the following lotion : —

Nitrate of Silver ... 1 scruple,
Destilled Water ... 1 ounce.

Mix and strain.

Or bathed with the following : —

Tormentil Root .... J ounce.
Boiling Water .... 3 ounces.

Boiled" together to two ounces, and strained.



VENEREAL ERUPTIONS OF THE FACE

AND SKIN.

These eruptive diseases are the production of a specific
irritation, or a peculiar disposition of the constitution,
which sooner or later gives rise to a series of obscure
phenomena, singular in their character, and very tedious
in their cure, repeatedly disappearing and returning.
They make the skin thick, rough, and unequal ; the
countenance acquires a livid hue ; and the whole face
exhibits an unnatural and unpleasing aspect, being
sometimes covered with spots of a reddish, brownish,
or copper colour, spreading on the forehead and chesty
and between the shouldeia, an^ «H«ii «;X«^^csa% '^s^vc



158 THB SILENT FUSND*

action to the palms of the hand : the breath becomes
offensive ; and the teeth also suffer. The general ap-
pearance of the eruption is that of hard scorbutic spots,
about the size of spangles, of a livid, brown, or copper
cast, only occasionally raised above the skin : the dis-
eased surface, soon after their appearance, becomes very
rough, and white scales fall off, leaving a slight pit
where they had previously been.

The manner of the eruption occasionally varies ; and
instead of displaying this kind of character, we find the
face and nose covered with real pimples, tetters, and
sebaceous concretions, which in their progress, become
very troublesome, and often suppurate ; they continue
to display, to the great annoyance of the individual, this
kind of indefinite action for a great length of time ;
even the larger spots occasionally continue to pit, till the
pit loses its covering, and degenerates into an actual
ulcer, discharging a thin acrid matter mixed with blood;
at other periods it throws out ragged watery excre-
scences, with itching, and even deep scaly ulceration.
With these appearances the face has been known to be
completely covered: (See plate 11, figs. 1 & 2.) and
not only is the breath offensive, but the other excretions
become also affected by this putrid action, and exhale a
very unpleasant effluvia. Prior to the re-appearance of
these eruptions, scales, and discolorations, the individual
is frequently sick and faint. There is an unaccount-
able langour and depression of spirits — prostration of
strength — ^restiess nights, pain in the various bones, or
rather a sort of tightness and aching sensation, as if
they were bound with a cord. Although about this
period the bones are evidentiy affected, the pain is never
so acute as in confirmed venereal affections principally
affecting these parts.

From the sensations experienced by the patient, the
pain about this time seems rather lodged about the ex-
ternal surface than in the body of the bone. Sleep
yields neither comfort nor refreshment — a disagreeable
sensation pervades the body, which is almost always
accompanied by emaciation.

It will be necessary to avoid warm liquids, to dress
ooolfy and ]ightlyi and to take mod&isXe exexci&e in the
open air with nourishing ^et.



.>?. i



». ..









>^k




-.'■■ *■ ...■






M.



■I

.: i



«' I



THE SILENT FRIEND. ' 159

The CoNCENTEATED Detersive Essence must be
taken regularly, according to the General Directions, and
a half-pint of the following decoction morning and after-
noon until the eruptions have entirely disappeared : —

Take of Sarsaparillajour ounces, of water two quarts ,
boil it down to three pints, and strain it off for use ; the
addition of two table-spoonsful of the Cordial Balm of
Syriacum to each dose of the Sarsaparilla, will assist
nature in producing a re-action and re-invigoration of
the system, purif3dng the blood in its general circulation
at the same time, and greatly facilitate the cure.

When the venereal eruptions are dry and scaly, the
following lotion must be applied twice a day*—

Oxymuriate of Mercury . . 2 grains.

Muriatic Acid .... 4 drops,

Emulsion of Bitter Almonds • 7^ ounces.

Simple Spirits of Lavender . 2 drachms.



VENEREAL SORE THROAT

Begins with little or no pain : at first there is felt only
a slight pricking or irritation, sometimes merely amount-
ing to an uncomfortable sensation, on swallowing food :
when the throat is examined, ulceration is perceptible,
the ulcers presenting a particular appearance : they are
of a conical shape, often of considerable depth, and
generally attack that part of the throat csdled the
almonds or tonsils : on each side they are covered with
a foul crust of thick white matter resembling hog's lard,
or rather of a cheeselike appearance : their effects, in
the end, are, to produce hoarseness, fetid breath, &c.

Besides the throat, every part of the mouth may oc-
casionally be the seat of venereal ulcers, though they
are most frequent on the palate or the tongue. A deep
copper-coloured spot, somewhere between the pap and
middle of the palate, is the first appearance : this spot
at last becomes ulcerated, and advances tQi.^\d!L^>\»:fCGk.\:QL
breadth ud depth. (See plate 12, ^%. \^ 1!>S!A ^>m» ^



160 THE SILENT FRIEND.

venereal sore throat is only to be accomplished by the
proper and gradual administration of the Concentrated
Detersive Essence, in doses of three tea-spoonsful
night and morning in a little water, which should be
continued imtil the throat is quite well ; after which the
Cordial Balm of Syriacum should be taken for at
least two months, but to assist their operation, check
the progress of the ulceration, and prevent its destroy-
ing the soft palate, it is necessary to make direct
applications to the throat, in the form of a gargle ; of
which the following will be found one of the most
successful : —

Tincture of Cayenne Pepper . 30 drops.
Muriatic Acid . . . .15 drops.
Infusion of Roses .... 6 ounces.

The throat to be gargled three or four times a day ;
care should be taken that none of the liquid pass down
the throat.



AFFECTIONS OF THE BONES.

Affections of the bones in S3rphilis, (occurring after
the primary symptoms have disappeared,) are often
mistdjLen for rheumatism, gout, lumbago, and are often
the indication of the continuance of the action of the
syphilitic poison or virus, not merely after the healing
of local sores, but even after ulceration in tl^e throat
and eruptive blotches upon the skin have entirely passed
away. It would seem that theie is an order of parts
mostly but not always attacked in successio » of which
the solid structure of the bones, as well as the fibrous
investment, are usually the last to suffer.

The symptoms which mark the disease are as fol-
lows : — The patient experiences in the evening a sen-
sation of dull aching, wearing pain in the bones, which
is afterwards the seat of the node. In the course of a
few days a swelling appears in the evening, which dis-
appears again on the following morning ; it is excessively
palnM and tender at night, but in the monvin^ it is



THE SILENT VRIIND. 161

hardly perceptible, and the tenderness is almost gone.
At this particular period the periosteum is also affected ;
but when the inflammation has continued some time
longer, the bone is diseased and becomes enlarged.
The long bones are the parts generally affected, when
nodes are formed, such as the shin bone and the clavicle.
They are sometimes formed on the skull, and there, as
in some other instances, the poisonous inflammation
soon leads to unhealthy action, and death of the bones
by suppuration or exfoliation.

The following treatment should be resorted to : —
Three tea-spoonsful of the Concentrated Deter-
siYE Essence in a wine-glassful of water twice a day,
and bathe the parts affected frequently with the follow-
ing embrocation : —

Sulphuric Ether .... 1 ounce,
Compound Camphor Liniment . 1 ounce^
Acetate of Morphia .... 2 grains,

VENEREAL ULCERS AND SORES

Must be dressed frequently with the hlacTc wash ordered
for chancres, or, if more convenient, the ointment pre-
scribed for buboes may be applied, either of its full
strength, or diluted with an equal quantity of lard, on
a little lint twice a day.

In the use of all these local applications to syphilitic
eruptions, it should be borne in mind that they are but
of secondary utility; for without the Concentrated
Detersive Essence the applications are next to useless.

Venereal infection may be conveyed to the embryo
infant, which in such case is said to be hereditarily
affected; these infants, at their birth, or at an early
period,exhibit symptoms which, in their progress, pre-
sent all the apparent characters of S3rphilitic disease :
some are covered with dark copper colored specks and
spots about various parts of the organs of generation :
some are excoriated, and have small angry-looking but
not deep-seated ulcerations: others are troubled with
ulcers about the mouth, lips, and nose : the eyes are
affected with amuco-purulent discharge ; the ears suffer,
&c. : in fact, it is not one organ -^iVdcVi «vsSSets^> \sNi^ •^aa
whole system : the child smsdSLett N«rj tk»r)cl \fik\3rt^'"e&^-



162 THE SILENT FRIEND.

ing, is fretful and weakly, wasting daily ; day after day
its cheeks become more pallid, and it looks anything
but healthy, suffering in its stomach, bowels, and the
alimentary canal generally ; the mesenteric glands, the
lungs, the liver, all become deranged; no part or
organ performs its functions with energy; and the
animal system is totally out of order : the child, it is
true, lives, but lives to misery and increased disease.
If the animal strength be sufficient to conquer these
affections, and the child struggle through the period of
infancy, then the disease retreats into its lingering and
chronic t3rpe ; and should this sweeping leviathan pass
over the lungs, mesentery, and the internal viscera, with
their tributary dependencies, it then fixes with Goliath
strength on the spine, and assumes its not less certain
but more modulated character of scrofula.

Thus this dreadful malady passes from one stage to
another, till the unhappy sufferer, weakened and wearied
by such repeated and incessant attacks, falls, in the
prime of age and intellect, the victim of its parent's
error.

To persons entering upon the responsibilities of matri"
mony, and who have ever had the misfortime dunng
their more youthful days to become affected by any
form of these diseases, a previous course of the Con-
centrated Detersive Essence is highly essential and
of the greatest importance, as more serious afflictions
are visited upon an innocent wife and offbpring from a
want of these simple precautions, than perhaps half the
world is aware of; for, it must be remembered, " where
the fountain is polluted^ the streams that flow from it
cannot be pure.**

CLEANLINESS.

Throughout the whole treatment of every species of
venereal complaints, a strict observance of cleanliness,
ought to be our first and constant object. Without thb,
we have not only to bear with the filthiness, naturally
arising from such complaints ; but it has been believed,
that the absorption of matter which, on such occasions,
must take place, greatly aggravates the very disease for
the removsd o£ which our Tetaed\ea axe a^i^'^^dL.



THE SILENT FRIEND. 163



OBSERVATIONS

ON THE EFFECTS OF MERCURY,

WHEN EMPLOYED

IN THE

TREATMENT OF SYPHILIS OR POX,

WITH DIRECTIONS FOR ?ROPER TREATMENT.



Of all the disorders of the human frame, there is
Hone which has baifled the skill of medical men more
than Syphilis ; and when we look to the general treat-
ment of this disease in all its various forms, we cannot
but deplore the great loss of life, which is daily occur-
ing from the use of that deadly poison. Mercury, which
is constantly administered by medical men, in cases of
the venereal disease ; the blood in the system is poUonedy
and by being so, it conveys, wherever it travels in the
arteries and veins, the seeds of disease. The blood thus
poisoned goes to the heart, and diseases of this organ
are the consequence : it goes to the lungs, and these
organs become morbidly deranged : in fact, to whatever
organ it travels, there it lays the foundation of disease.
In cases like these, it has hitherto been the custom of
the faculty, not to rid the system of the poison which is
destroying the unhappy suffer by inches^ and preying
upon his vitals, but they have pursued a course of treat-
ment as incorrect with sound theory, as it is repugnant
to humanity and common sense.

One would naturally suppose that some drug would
be administered to coimteract the effects of the poison
circulating in the veins. Not. so ! Instead of so doing,
other poisons have been thrown into the system, in the
shape of mercury, arsenic, and other mineral poisons.
And what are the consequences of this unnatural «s&sL
inhuman mode of treatment *> IIYife \xT&at\.\MNa^fc \i€\SNSi^



1-64 Tfl£ SII^ENT ]9Ri£NJP»

has caries of his bones, copper coloured eruptions make
their appearance all over his body, with running sores
in the neck, and distorted features, (See plate 13,
fig. 1 and 2.)

Yes, the rotten skulls which are to be found in the
anatomical museums — ^with- all the other beautiful
specimens of diseased, bones which in, our younger
days were so abundant in hospitals, in the great ma-
jority of cases were the production of long and haras-
sing courses of mercury. The rash, indiscri]3aiiLate»
and unqualified use of Mercury has been productive
of infinite mischief. Under the notion of its being
an antidote, the untutored think they have only to
saturate the system with mercury, and the business
is accomplished. Fatal error ! Thousands are annu-
ally either mercurialized out of existence, or their
constitutions so broken and the functions of nature
so impaired, as to render the residue of life miserable..

The disorder which we have in view, owes it» fatal
results either to neglect or ignorance. In the first
stage it is always local, and easy to be extinguished^
without the slightest injury to the constitution ; but
when neglected or improperly treated, a mere local
affection may be converted into an incurable and fatal,
malady. What a pity that a young man, the hope
of his country and the darling of his parents, should
be snatched from all the prospects and enjoyments of
life by the consequences of one unguarded moment,
and by a disease which is not, in its own nature fatal,
and which never proves so if properly treated ! To do
ample justice to the case a man must devote his entire
attention to investigate diseases, to detect their occult
indications, and promptly to apply a safe and radical
remedy. But, to prevent all the dangerous conse-
quences emanating from the dregs of this disease
lingering in the constitution, and to eradicate them
when present, the Concentrated Detersive Essence
ofiers a certain remedy. Many valuable lives have
been preserved by it, and many painful sufferings
relieved, when all other means have failed ; in fact, so
beneficial have been its effects in these cases, that, to
cla. justice to the medicine as vrell aia the patient, it



i, ..



I. • ,



.IT.'.



11*



' .. I-



■w •







111
Is?







k



O'RE SILElNT FRIEND. 165

becomes a duty to declare it, and make its virtues
known. It must be understood, that to accomplish
such an invaluable object has not been the mere result
of chance or fancy, but the reward of long and un-
wearied research, not alone into the disease for which
this medicinil discovery is so aptly appHcable, and
those causes which give rise to it, but also of deep
enquiry, experiment, and observation of those chemi-
cal substances capable, by their peculiar mode of
action, of overcoming these causes. No schemes
or theories can be brought to perfection in the
study only; — reflection may bring forth the idea,
but practice alone can prove its efficacy. No-
thing speaks louder, in the treatment of disease, of
the advantages to be derived from the powers of any
particular medicine, than that graYid test, experience.
The joyful news of health, ease, and comfort, spread
far and wide from those who have fortunately found
it, w^hile the truth prevails by its own excellence ;

Magna est Veritas, et prevalebU,

and hence will be proved the beneficial operations and
results of this discovery, which needs only be made
known to the world to claim its just reward, and demon
strate its utility and value.

But it is necessary to state, that it will be in vain
to expect relief from this remedy without punctuality ;
for taking a dose or two properly, then leaving off for
some days and beginning again, wiU be of no service.
The doses must be taken regularly*

Patients who reside in the country, at whatever dis-
tance, can have the remedies applicable for their several
disorders, forwarded to any part of the United King-
dom, carefully secured in a portable compass, and in
every respect ready for convenient use. They are re-
quested to be as minute as possible in the detail of
their cases, as to the duration of the complaint, the
symptoms, age, habits of living, and general occupa-
tion.



166 THE SILENT FRIEND.



PERRY'S
PREVENTATIVE LOTION,



The details contained in the preceding chatpter re-
specting the causes, nature, sjrmptoms, and progress of
the various forms of the venereal disease, will sufficiently
explain why these maladies are held in such dread and
horror by most persons, that rather than incur the risk
of contagion from impure copulation, they prefer the
certainty of the evils, both bodily and mental, which
inevitably follow sooner or later the practice of self-
pollution.

There cannot exist a doubt in the minds of all right
thinking men, that youths, from the dread of contagion
and the family quarrels that might arise therefrom, as
well as being led away by bad advice and evil example,
are prone to exercise the functions of nature, and to
gratify the passions which the period of puberty awakens
into life, by yielding to the insidious advice of the
tempter, and practising a crime which, as we have
already fully shewn, is condemned alike by God and
man, and which will assuredly bring in its train, a long
series of diseases and wretchedness both of mind and
body, and ultimately induce premature old age, decay,
and an early and miserable termination to existence.

Young men who have attained the adult period of
life, may in many instances avoid the (supposed) neces-
sity for the commission of this sin, by entering into the
marriage state. But although this is a

** Consummation most devoutly to be wished ;"

yet it is not one that every person is either prepared or
able to adopt. Pecuniary circimistances may interfere ;
a young man may be fully capable of supporting him-
self in comfort, or he may be ready to rough it for
himself, while he would natuiaW^ ^^^ ^^^ -vov^iKi&cw^tA.



THE SILENT FRIEND^ 167

plunge anothel*, and that an affectionate and beloved
wife, into the endurance of the discomforts which to
him are nothing, but to a female tenderly and carefully
brought up, would be a source of constant annoyance,
despite the care and affection she would experience from
her husband. Many young men, again, hold back from
matrimony, from the fear of having a large family at a
too early an age ; others again are prevented by family
reasons : in short it would be almost an endless task to
enumerate aU the reasons which keep the young men of
the present day, in the forlorn condition of bachelors.

What then is to become of them ; are they to endure
the excitement of their passions by the natural dis-
tended condition of the seed-reservoirs and of the seed-
bearing vessels, the testicles meanwhile continually pour-
ing out more semen, — are they, we say, to be in this
distressing state of re-iterated excitement, and seek to
control their passions by moral axioms and dark say-
ings of old — knowing as they must do all the while
that moderate enjoyment of sexual intercourse — mind
we say expressly, moderate enjoyment — ^is alike bene-
ficial to the power of the body and mind — are they to
endure this condition of the system, or must they give
way to their passions, and incur the risk, nay the
almost certainty of infection, or else have recourse to
the odious vice by which the power of body and mind
are alike prostrated ?

Fortunately the resources of medicine step in and
free them from this tantalizing situation. Although
impure connexion is of itself an evil and a sin, yet is
it of so much less iniquity than that monster crime of
Onanism, that it appears almost like refined gold be-
side it. It is one which few young men would hesitate
to acknowledge, while a natural shame urges them to
keep all knowledge of the latter offence entirely to
themselves, and to shun all allusion to it. Of these two
evils, we would say choose the Jess — but there stands
in the way the stumbling block of contagion or infection.

The dread of being infected with gonorrhea or clap,
and syphilis then prevents many from the natural and
moderate indulgence of the passions, and drives them to
the commission of mastutbatiooL. Ttoa S& "^ ^«^ ^



168 TBE SILENT FRIENIT.

things very shocking to contemplate, and the evil is s<y
much the greater that from the great number of unmax-^
ried men in large towns, and the indiscriminate inter-
course that takes place between them and the fair but
frail Cyprians who perambulate our streets, the greatest
precaution before the act, manifested in the selection of
the female, etc., will not avail to protect the maiir
against disease. In fact the female may impart disease^
although she herself be at the time free from any symp-
toms of it, inasmuch as she may have had a previous visi-
tor, labouring under infection, and her organs may have-
retained sufficient of the virus to infect her next friend.

How then can a young man indulge his natural feel-
ings and desires, without danger and without incurring
the dreadful consequences of Onanism ?

We have already said that happily the resources of
medicine come to his relief:

PERRY'S PREVENTATIVE LOTION

will enable him to have connexion without any reason
to dread the consequences in the shape of the venereal
disease, in any of its forms, such as gonorrhea or clap,
and sjrphilis. It should be used after each act of con-
nexion — ^the penis being carefully washed with it, and
the gland and prepuce, more especially about the corona,
being cleansed most attentively and assiduously with it*
Carefully and attentively employed according to these
directions,

PERRY'S PREVENTATIVE LOTION

will effectually prevent all danger from indiscriminate
sexual intercourse.

Price 33s. per Bottle, or in £s Cases.

PREPARED ONLY BY

MESSRS. R. AND L. PERRY AND Co.,
19, BXiBNEBS-STBEET OZFOED-STBEET,

LONDOIS,



THE SILENT. FRIEND. 169

Observe the signature impressed in a stamp on the
outside of each wrapper, and the name and address of
the proprietors blown in each bottle.

May be had of all Patent Medicine Vendors in town
and country throughout the United Kingdom, the Con-
tinent of Europe and America.



ON MARRIAGE.



Having duly considered the diseases pertaining to
the reproductive powers of both sexes, from early in-
dulgence or infection, we now oiFer a few remarks on
that sacred condition which the late " Invalid '* when
convalescent, wiU probably be most anxious to adopt.

Conjugal society is a perpetual compact between
man and woman to live together in mutual love and
friendship, for the procreation, conservation, and edu-
cation of children, and to aid each other by mutual
succour for the course of life. The diiFerence of the
sexes was instituted for this purpose ; and there is an
innate desire implanted in both to perpetuate their
species, their names, and to transfer their property to
their children.

Of all the social institutions, there is none which
exercises so great an influence upon states as marriage.
The prosperity of a nation depends upon the strength
and vigour of its inhabitants, which are powerfully
influenced by the comparative perfection to which the
marriage laws are carried.

It was therefore wisely ordained that marriage should
be a sacred compact, for which those engaged in it
should forsake their nearest relations and friends. The
parties contracting it form the strictest union and
nearest relation that can be established between two
individuals ; their temporal concerns are identical, and
their social and individual happiness dependent on each
other, and consequently marriage is universally con-
sidered a source of the greatest comfort and most per-
fect enjoyment on earth, securing all the advantages of
sincere friendship, and the reciprocal offices of tt\v& «S)^
tender affection. The parties eii\«t\si% \s&ft '^cca^ '^vais*^



170 THE 8ILBNT FRIEND.

TOW mutual love, fidelity and friendship. It was there-
fore most wisely ordained in the beginning of ti]ne«
that *' a man shall leave his father and mother) and
shall cleave to his wife, and they shall be one flesh."

Marriage was originally instituted between the first
of the human species, as a religious, political, civil, and
moral contract of Divine ordinance — the origin of 80ci«-
ety, the law of the reproduction of the species, — a con-
tract for the transmission of property, — a guarantee
for obligations the most interesting to mankind. It is
therefore universally to be respected.

Man is a rational and social being, deriving his chief
earthly happiness from the delights of society, and
the interchange of thought. It is the interchange of
the charities and sympathies of life, which gives to
human existence its real and only value. Hence, man
in a state of solitude, or even of isolated luxury or af-
fluence, would be the most pitiable and miserable of
creatures.

Exposed to the corroding cares, sorrows, bitter dis-
appointments, and misfortunes of life, man cannot
brave alone, and unfriended, the ingratitude, envy, and
malevolence of the world.

The perfection and sincerity of friendship can only
be found in the marriage state, where an identity of
interests shuts out all petty jealousies and vexations,
and a unity of thought, sentiment, feeling, and con-
duct exists. The qualities essential to conjugal hap-
piness are chiefly of a mental or moral nature, and not
merely of a physical kind, as is imfortunately too
generally the case.

The proper age for marriage, according to the law of
this country, is twenty-one for a male and eighteen
fi>r a female; but many physiologists are of opinion
that the ages of twenty*five and twenty-one would
more accord with the complete development of adult
powers. Buflbn held this position, 'Hhe natural state
of man after puberty is marriage;" but this is evi-
dently untenable, because the human body is not fvHy
developed at this period of life, the diflerent functions
are not perfect, and as the organs are only in the pro*-
gresB of their growth, the offspring ^o\xli ^^ vofixtKv «aad



THE SILENT FRIEND. 171

delicate ; and the sexes totally incompetent to perform
their various important duties of parents. It is at, or
rather after the adidt age, that the mind and body hare
arrived at perfection ; and therefore moralists and legis-
lators have fixed this age as the best for marriage.

It is universally known, that premature or excessive
exertion of any part of the body is succeeded by fatigue
or decay of such part ; and more especially before
complete development has taken place. Hence it fol-
lows, that the premature exertion of the genital func-
tions, or marriage at too early an age, must not only be
highly injurious to the parents in most cases, but also
to the constitution of the offspring. It is also a moral
and medical precept, that both male and female should
observe the strictest continence until the adult age, so
that the great end of marriage, the propagation of
healthy children may be accomplished.

Persons of strong and sound constitutions beget
healthy infants, while those who undergo excessive
mental or corporeal exertion have generally feeble off-
spring. It is for this reason that simple, stupid villagers
generally beget children of high physical and moral
powers ; while men of the greatest genius, who over-
exert their mental faculties, often engender only idiots
or pusillanimous infants. By protracted continence or
purity of morals, the species are improved and strength-
ened both in mind and body.

It is manifest that the offspring of parents whose
attachment to each other is but slight, or who are
labouring under the infirmities of old age, or are en-
feebled by the destructive habit of self-pollution, are
themselves not only feeble and debilitated, but without
any remarkable faculties. It is also well known that
parents contaminated with ill-cured sjrphilis, often beget
infants which are born dead and decomposed between
the seventh and eighth month of pregnancy ; and that
the disease in question is a common cause of premature
parturition. It does not, however, follow that every
man infected with syphilis in its secondary or chronic
form, begets infants that perish in the last months of
pregnancy, for it requires a certain de^te^ q»^ ^-o^s^ssssc*.-
nation to cause this result •, vrtxexi \)ci^ XalvoN. *"«» ^^^^5$^



172 THE SILEKT FRIEKI>«

in&nts are bom alive, but weak and delicate, and eiiher
covered with a copper or dark-coloured eruption abcAit
the genitals and tiiighs at birth, or else it appears -socm
afterwards. We have fully described this disease in
infants in another part of this treatise.

During the last few years we have known numeirous
instances where men having laboured under local debi<*
lity, have been disappointed in begetting offspring, but
who upon their recovering, have rendered the inamage<i'
bed fruitful. Impuissance in the male, then, may be
considered, as far as our judgment carries us, the mort •
frequent cause of fruitless marriages.

The want of offspring is a source of much domestic
infelicity to married couples. We do not mean to
imply that family jars are engendered in lieu tiiereof ;
but there is necessarily a want appreciated best by
those who are fortunately blest with a &mily. How
common is the expression with heirless people, ** I
would give anything to have a child."

If it is in the power of medicine to furthcsr that
object, the Cordial Balm of Syriacuh can alone
afford assistance ; it strengthens tiie secretory vessels
and the reservoirs at the same time, and by that means
removes radically all the affections of the genital parti
m both sexes ; substituting vigour for impotence, and
fecundity in place of barrenness.

Marriage was instituted by the divine Creator in the
time of man's primitive innocence, as the means of his
happiness, and for the perpetuation of his race. The
wisdom of its institution has been felt and acknow-
ledged in every age ; but before undertaking that
important and prudent step, we would suggest the
necessity of the patient first thoroughly convincing
himself of his perfect recovery, and of obtaining die
sanction of his medical attendant, ere he embark his
happiness and that of a being who ought to be most
dear to him, by a process which he cannot afterwards
honourably annul, and which, unless he be thoroughly
restored, wiU entail physical deformity and mental
misery on the innocent and helpless.

Among the disqualifications of marriage are varioui
diseases, — congenital, that is to ^^.^^ Xko^^ ^^qiWiVv ^«aeft



THE SILENT FRtEND. 179

bam with us ; accidental, and those which proceed from,
infection, all of which have been treated upon in their
several places ; but of all causes of the impairment of
the virile powers, excess of indulgence is the most
powerful. Marriage, as has been already stated, has, a8>
one of its most important aims, the propagation of the
species, and the consequent perpetuation of the human,
race. It is obvious that those persons who have rendered
themselves impotent by excessive sexual indulgence, or
by the practice of the solitary passion, — the worst of all
vices — are, until they have been restored to a state of
health and functional perfection by the resources of art,
totally unfit to enter on the marriage state, as they are
incapacitated for the performance of its special rite.

In order that this may be fidly understood, it may be
advisable to give some account of the physiology of
generation, — a subject in itself most germain to the-
nature of this work.

We have often been asked to state our opinion re-
specting the frequency with which the repetition of
sexual excitement may take place, without the produc*
tion, immediate or remote, of any injury to the general'
constitution* As very few individuals govern them-
selves, particularly in early Ufe, by rules of caution on
this interesting point, unless physical necessity binds
them to it, we shall merely state that the rites of Venus
should be circumscribed within the limits of temperance,
and that no unnecessary stimuli should be used to excite
this natural function into action ; for copulation with
men, like menstruation with women, terminates in many
diseases : much must depend, on the natural powers of
the constitution, and the peculiar frame of the individual's
susceptibility to animal excitement, as well as the care
displayed towards the individual during the period of
his growth ; and many subsidiary circumstances, both
of a general, local, and mental character, with certain
limitations, are to be considered ; for with some, chastity
has no virtue.

We are acquainted with no function of the animal
mechanism so specially dependent upon the mind as
this : for though sexual intercourse is a comi^ouxNd ^bs^
of the body and the.mindi ils eBaenXasiX ««v«t^ ^*-^\s^^^^s5k-



174 THE SILENT FRIEND.

liar stimuli, proceed from the mind ; and according to
the exciting energy of the mind is the act performed.
Thus, from a compound act of indescribable pleasure
and languor, organic beings are endowed with power to
produce others similar to themselves ; or rather, an
essential part of themselves is separated in the act, the
power of that separation being concentrated in the gen-
erative organs. The moment the semen has passed,
from the greater exertion used by the male, languor and
depression succeed ; and at this period his office is com-
plete, and a new and complicated arrangement takes
place in the female : but what is the character of that
arrangement which actually takes place within the female
uterus, when, after experiencing the most delightful
and exquisite of all sensual pleasure, being properly
impregnated, and on the eve of giving form and ex-
istence to her offspring, we yet know not.

The expansive theory of impregnation presents to the
consideration innumerable points resting their basis on
conjectural knowledge ; and as we advance amid con-
flicting opinions, the intricacy of investigation loses
none of its difficulty, because the experiments necessary
to elucidate the facts are too minute to define ; and even
the result of those elaborate experiments, instead of
giving support and new energy to each other, are very
frequently in opposite contact. Science makes but a
painful effort, when she endeavours to direct the atten-
tion to the first principles of the research ; for from
what stamina proceeds the primary principle of animal
matter ? Is a germen formed in the ovarium of the
female, merely requiring impregnation by the semen
virile ? Is the homunculus contained in that semen ; the
female ovarium affording only a nidus for its formation ?
or does it co-equally originate from male and female ?
and is the animal produced by a reciprocal action of the
seminal fluids ? The peculiar and very striking sim-
ilarity of feature, frame, and constitution, to each
individual parent, supports the probability of such a
rational hypothesis ; which acquires new strength by a
reference to the vegetable kingdom, and, in the opinion
of many, incontestibly shews that the offspring is a
compound of each individual patent. Ixv oy^q(^^1\q\v t»



THE SILENT FRIIND. 17S

these apparent evident conclusions, we hare to remark,
that the minutest dissection exhibits no vessels in the
female organs adapted to the secretion of semen ; there-
fore it justly becomes an object of considerable doubt
whether the female#has the power of secreting semeti
It is true, when impregnation has taken place, the nutri-
tive apparatus assumes a proper increase at the sole
expense of the female, in order to serve for the nutrition
of the embryo ; and the blood, in its passage through
the vessels of the placenta, undergoes changes analogous
to those which it experiences in the full grown animal,
in its passage through the lungs and liver, by its assum-
ing in those vessels new vital properties.

In order to illustrate, as far as our investigation can
go, the nature of this animal process, by which the sen-
sitive creation is formed, and whose constant operation
is known from experience, it will be necessary to in-
quire what is requisite for that purpose. The ovum
must be in a state of maturity : there must be a great
determination of blood in the womb, sufficient, together
with the venereal stimuli, to induce a certain action in
the Fallopian tubes, by which the fimbriae grasp the
ovum that is to be impregnated. During this condi-
tion of the parts concerned, the semen virile must be
propelled into the uterus, in order that its vivifying
particles shall pass along the tube to the ovarium. Fe-
cundation having actually taken place, a motion is in-
duced in the vivified ovum, which ruptures the tender
vesicles that contain it : the action of the fimbriae of
the Fallopian tube is then induced, which grasp and
convey it into the tube ; which, by its peculiar peris-
taltic motion, conducts it into the cavity of the uterus,
there to vivify and maturate to a proper increase, at the
expense of the mother. What is the precise mode
which nature takes to vivify the germ, or what actually
takes place at the moment of conception, investigation
has left us where it found us : all we are certain of,
is, that this vital power is usually difiused through all
animate creation. From the knowledge we have of the
correct operations of nature, we have no doubt, were we
possessed of the means minutely to examisLe tiN& ^'H'«sx»acek.
at the period of fecund&tioa and. d^k]nack^^dDA ^«£^ ^a«|^



176 THB SILENT FRIBNII.

of uterine gestation, a series of phenomena would be
developed which we could render ^uniliar to our reaaou;
but having no such opportunity, we wander througii tiic
extensive labyrinth of the phenomena that accoxnpay
the vital Amctions of reproduction, without being Mt
to acquire any positive fact that can lead to a result
favourable to our limited investigation. It is uni¥er«>
sally admitted, and ancient and modern investigatiBii
supports the universality of that admission, that aU
parts of an animal body are formed ob oriffine^ aad
exist, though that existence is in miniature, freiiL the
first formation of the foetus in utero ; and that no OBe
part of the animal frame owes its existence to another.
Leuwenhoeck maintains that animalculae exist in the
semen virile ; but by what mode these are producedy
he left the inquiring mind to search for. Others, again,
have supposed that the semen virile is itself unor-
ganised ; that after remaining in the vesiculae seminalei
a given period, it becomes there concocted ; and, on> itr
arrival in utero, takes an action, that germinates into
existence, where nature provides for its support and ex-
pulsion. The continuity of the act is the only point
we can ascertain, and from which these facts are de-
duced ; viz. that a being, once created, never die* —
that, in its progress through life, it is subject to a cer-
tain action, which changes its character without destroy-
ing its particles, and though, by chemical attraction and
combination, it may enter into an infinity of bodies^
yet it must carry with it some of its original germ,
which was contained in the ovum when fecundated by
the secretion of the male coming in contact with it, the
vivifying principle of which is afterwards solely nourish*
ed by the female : for at the moment of fecundation,
by a mutual process of action and re-action, a circula-
tion takes place between the foetus in embryo and the
nutritive power of the mother, by the placenta, and, as
far as hypothesis goes, gives strong proofs of the pre-
existence of the germ in the female.

From this it evidently appears, that the semen is of
the first importance to the animal, economy ; that if it is
repeatedly excited to emission by an unnatural stimulus,^
the parts become feeble ; and ii earned. V> i^^ex^ %e&^



THE SILEKT FRIEND* 177

excess, It causes impotence^ by rendering the semen so
thin, as even to stain the linen of a yellow color. Such
semen has not had due time to concoct, and is emitted
without desire or ability : in some cases the secretion
takes place so quickly, that the least friction on the
^bms has produced its emission, even the act of walking
or riding fest. Yet here we would have it distinctly
imderstood, that all organs are strengthened and im*
proved by a proper and natural exercise of their func-
tions ; and at the end of a certain period, they perform
with ease those actions which at first were difficult to
them*

Respecting the act itself, it is ever to be considered
of service to the full grown individual, and is just^
ranked among the necessary evacuations ; for, modified
agreeably to the mechanism of the various and com-
plicated circumvolutions of the vessels through which it
has to pass, it obeys an analogous law to that which
regulates the discharges, and, in a given proportion, it^
preternatural retention of emission eidiibits similar
symptoms of derangement ; thus a too great and con-
tinued evacuation of this elaborate fiuid, not only im-
pairs its particular organs, but immediately or remotely
affects the whole system, producing tremor, relaxation,
dejection, &c. ; whilst, by its long retention, it not only
diminishes the actual energies of youthful passions in
the attitude of their meridian vigour, but finally pro-
duces a reluctance to the sublime and more fascinating
blandishments of sexual bliss, and with a cachectic habit
of body and morosity of disposition ; for by long re-
tention of the semen, it not only loses its stimulating
character, but even the spermatic vessels close for want
of the active blood to distend and to stimulate them
into action^

Nor is it a matter of astonishment, that where these
habits, or venereal excitement, are frequent, some man-
ifest effect should be produced on the constitution ; the
first more than the latter, because nature is more con-
sulted by one action than the other : and as these
organs first suffer, receiving their nervous ramification
from the spinal marrow, it has been concluded (rRith.
Bome Analogy to (actf we xmi&t oonSe^ «i&^^ ^^\&s£)k:qisj^*



17S THE SI LINT friend;

ment of tabes dorsalis : — ^it may be the exciting, but
never the predisposing cause. Nor are these effects
less vivid and certain on the male than the female ; for
these unfortunate habits ffive to the female an irrita-
bility of constitution, and an ardency of mind, which,
as the system advances to its final period of develop-
ment, renders them susceptible to uterine disease and
its varied symptoms : and where, from a peculiar deli-
cacy of structure, a predisposition or a natural irrita-
biUty of system exists, this habit not only produces 8
corresponding excitement in the uterine vessels, but
brings with it a train of nervous derangement that an-
nihilate the best efforts of medicine to control, and
thus give birth to those chronic and non-defined diseases
yclept ner\'ous.

We believe that tabes dorsalis has rarely been brought
on by actual venery. The distinction between venery
and self-pollution consists in the one having no actual
excitement or proper object for emissiom : the indivi-
dual loses all, and gains nothing ; while by excessive
coition with a lovely woman, a man is not sensible of
his lassitude and feeling ; conscious of directing bis
passions to ' their proper focus, no remorse remains be-
hind, to become the gnawing canker-worm of the heart.
Surely, then, this holds forth to the unhappy a pleasing
prospect of consolation when he departs from this un-
natural practice — a practice he ought to leave no means
untried to break from.

Another and equally great consolation to the afflicted^
is, that when the diseases resulting from pollution and
excess have been cured, the functions of generation are
restored, and the previously unhappy victim of folly is
placed in a condition to acquit himself properly of his
duties as a husband, and ultimately as a parent.

Individuals may be injured in more ways than one ;
few constitutions are capable of bearing with the re-
petition of the act of coition, even when practised in a
moderate manner, without feeling the loss nature has.
sustained by the effort ; while by having too frequent
intercourse, (and this is often the case with married
persons of sanguine disposition) the seminal fluid, in-
ftead of being of its natural consia^ne^ ^ Vxx cotl^^q^^ii^^



THE SILENT FRIEND. 179

«>f the continnal drain, and the enormous demand cm
the genital organs, at last becomes thin, and watery,
and without the least prolific power. The effects of
this excessive drain on the most important secretion
of the body, and of the great nervous excitement which
accompanies it, are soon clearly made in the general
condition of the economy. When such is the case,
it is of the utmost importance to replenish the loss
which has been sustained, and to restore, or as it were
regenerate, the exhausted powers of the system : to
further that object, the Cordial Balm of Syriacuh
can alone afford assistance ; it should be taken in the
dose of one table spoonful and a half, three times a day,
viz. morning, noon, and night, in order to enrich the
semen, and favour the reproduction of that liquor, so
as to ensure at once its due elaboration, and sufficient
retention for the next demand. The virile powers
would not become impaired even in old age, if this
medicine were imiversally adopted.



CASES.

The following communications are made public, at
the earnest desire of the parties who have been under
our care, some of whom have intimated a wish to have
their names attached, while others have objected from
feelings of shame. To prevent any unpleasant feeling
on so delicate a subject, we have substituted the general
initials of A. B., CD., &c. ; nor do we desire at
any ftiture period to adopt any other plan, or to pubKsh
any case or communication, but such as we may be
entitled to make public, at the request of the parties
themselves to whom such cases refer.

L. O. B. aged 20, apparently stout, was about six years ago, whil^ at
school, initiated in baneful practices. It was not till after three years'
continuance in these habits, that he felt the least inconvenience froim
them. Then, however, he was suddenly afiected with frequent emissicms
while in bed; but as they proved troublesome only for the moment, he
was not in the least intimidated by them, aaoillQt ^i«» «&sst>\v^
iinued big habit more frequently <»*1»3IL «v«c. lOooraX V«q i^m» 'V|S^



180 THX SILENT miXKB.

iDToluntary emissions became more frequent, occurring four and alh m
fix times in the week. They were then followed by cold shiyerings, which
lasted for an hour or two each time, with complete inability to sleep
during the remainder uf the ni^ht. lie was also affected with frequent
cold pcritpirations all over the body, coldness of the extremities, shrinking
of the penis, and ^reat pain at the stomach : sometimes with a vorau:iou»
appetite for food, but more frequently a disgust for food for several days.
On such occasions, if he swallowed anything but liquids, the sensations
he felt in the stomach were not only painful, but indescribably irksome.
From the difficulty, too, which be felt in being obliged to perform the
act of respiration, which was almost entirely effected by the voluntaiy
powers, he believed he should die suddenly while in bed. About tlut
time, he felt an irregular swelling in one testicle ; and he began, for the
flrst time, to suspect the cause of his complaint. In order that his •rel*'-
ttons mi;;ht not become acquainted with it, he exerted his ingenuity to
prevent them applying for medical assistance. He at first thought, that,
by abstaining from his former practices, which he resolved to do. he
should recover without lieiag obliged to have recourse to any other ez--
pedient; but thU would not do; in addition to his other distresses
his bowels became obstinately costive, and he could procure no evacu-
ation, without the assistance of cathartic medicines. These with the
eold bath, and the internal use of bark and wine, and occasionally mine-
ral waters, were the only medicines he usc^i till he commenced taking

the CORDUL B4LM OF S7RIACUM.

In the October following, this gentleman enjoyed much better healA
flian he had done for about three years before ; his appetite was more re-
gular, and the state of his bowels more natural ; his sleep was undisturb-
td by frightful dreams, ana the emissions only occurred once a week,
and were unattended by the sensations formerly so distressing to him.
We desired him to continue the medicme a few weeks longer.

On the 2nd of June in the succeeding year, we were glad to be informed
by our patient, that his health was perfectly good, that he was capable of
exercising all his functions, and seldom had an emission.



Oentlemea. Plymouth, Aug, 2nd, 1841.

Through a destructive secret practice which I have given way to fh)m
a very early period. I have greatly impaired the powers of my body and
Blind. A dizziness comes over my eyes, a singing and sometimes a duU
noise In my ears ; with dejection of spirits. I am very nervous, and upon
the least irritation, such a trembling comes over me that I can scarcely
stand ; and I have frequently a sensation as if cold water were running
rom the crown of my head down my back. I have new scarcely any
desire for venereal pleasures ; and very seldom an erection. When- 1
' w^^** • ''•*«*aJs. 1 am seiied wtth suth-% txem\i&n% ^ftMk.mi Ve^



, THS SILENT FRIEND. ' 161

l^ardly support me ; my teeth chatter, my mouth becomes parched and
dry, a thin, clear, and slimy liquid runs from the penis, which seems
likewise so chilly and flabby, that at times I cannot produce an erection
sufficiently strong to perform the act. Upon taking any familiarities
with a female, though it may i>roducc a faint desire or sensation, I have
no erection, but a little titillation, and the same thin clear water comes
from me, without leaving any stain upon my linen.

My stools leave at times a slimy substance after them. My mind is so
overpowered with the thoughts of this complication of symptoms, that
scarcely anything a£fords me pleasure ; the least exercise fatigues ; and 1
frequently sit thinking of my misfortunes, till the idea of having brought
them upon myself almost distracts me.

I am induced to apply to you for advice, having read a case similar to
my own in your invaluable work entitled the " Silent Friend."

In consequence of having practised the detestable vice of Onanism^ my
constitution is so reduced, and the parts are rendered so imbecile by con-
tinued repetitions of that solitary gratification, that frequently in the act
of coition the penis suddenly drops, nor will erection, although ever so
slight, take place for hours afterwards. I am twenty-five years of age;
and have pursued this vicious habit for many years.

Inclosed is your usual consultation Fee. Your early attention to my
unfortunate situation will much oblige. Yours, respectfully W.Ub

The following extract from this gentleman's ninth letter will show cht
wonderful efficacy of the Cordial Balm of Syriacum, another courst of
which the party determined to enter upon.

" After this favourable report, if you think necessary, pray send
but I am satisfied of my recovery, &c."

Nov. 20th., 1841. W.H.



Glasgow.
Dear Sirs,— I do not find in your Silent Friend any case similar to my
own ; I shall, therefore without reserve state my case, and if you are of
opinion that the Cordial Balm of Syriacum wUl cure me, I will commence
A course willingly. I have had one or two attacks of gonorrhea, and
since I had the last, about three years ago, I have been suffering some-
what under that state described as morbid irritability, and an inability to
retain the fiuid in the secreting organs. Before the period stated, my
powers were quite equal I believe to those of the generality of men. My
age is forty three, and I am in excellent general health and spirits. Since
the period above stated, I do not think the penis has ever had the ca.i^«jiA^-^
ft formerly had, when in bed. 1 conBt«n.W7 tiv?^ ct*R.\aoT»&,\j>\sX ^-i^^ssw^>S.
fvwgemUnhl emissions. On these oecuiottt, \\« ciwjetfsiA ^ ^^-^ro^^^®*-



182 ¥RE StLElTT FRt£KD.

out any emissions ; but when I address a female, yrith aa intent to fib-
habitation, the penis immediately becomes half erected, and flnid ooaes
out, without any sensation whateirer. This, however, does not quendi
the desire. When I come to the point with a female, I feel all the desire I
OTer did, but the watery oozing continues, and the penis does not expand
to anything near the size it does when I am by myself in bed. When I
commence the act of cohabitation, I frequently emit b^f^rt I penetrate,
and invriabiy the instant 0^'Ur penetration. I presume it must be a
weakness in the vessels containing the fluid. I have now waived all
delicacy, and fully explained to you my ease, and I hope you will exease
the freedom with which I have done so. I should say my case came
under the head of nervous debility, but that I am in excellent health and
spirits. If gentlemen, you think, on this full statemAit, that you see my
case clearly and can cure it, I shall be liappy to place myself under yow
care as soon as possible. You will of course be pleased to comider this

as strictly private.

I am, dear Sirs, yours truly, K.R.C.

Extract.
" With great pleasure I announce my complete recovery, I have now
airived at as good a state of health and strength as ever ; the medicine
has been long finished, and my delay in writing was, that I wished to see
if there would be any return of the disorder. K.R.C.



A young gentleman of the age of sixteen had contracted a certain hafait,
which he continued until he was twenty-five. At this period he experi-
enced extreme weakness of the optic nerves, and a very great dimness of
sight : his memory was much impaired ; he had also violent head aches,
and sometimes excruciating pains in his forehead and temples. On en-
deavouring to read he frequently found himself seized with a species of
giddiness, similar to that resulting from a state of inebriation; the pupils
of the eyes also were extremely dilated, and pained him most acutely.
He often shed tears involuntarily, and a quantity of corrosive pus con-
tinually oozed from the comers of his eyes. One of the worst and most
debilitating symptoms, was an infirmity, to which he was sultject, al-
most every night in his sleep, which reduced him to a most deplorable
state of debility and emaciation.

This was an extremely obstinate and protracted case, but in the course
of a few months he was restored to himself, if we may use the expression,
and to society, of which he is now a respectable and useM ttember.



TO MESSRS. PERRY & Co., Surgeons.

Dear Sin,— I return you my sincere thacuks and most grateful ackxiow
iedgmeata, ior the woxiderAil eure 1 have expetleuQe^, %x)A wm. «x](x«ibaVi



THE SILENT FRIEND. 1 83

desirous of annexing my remarkable case to your list of cures for the good
of society. I am forty years of age, and about 18 months ago was afflicted
in the following distressing manner: — a disordered stomach, dry con-
sumptive cough, weakness in the voice, hoarseness, shortness of breath
on the least exercise, and relaxation of the whole system, paleness,
languor of the eyes, weakness of sight and memory, proceeding, no doubt,
from the baneful and solitary vice which is early acquired at school. I
applied to several of the faculty, but received no benefit, and was in con-
sequence prevented from entering into the marriage state. I was at last
recommended by a friend of mine who had derived great benefit from
taking your Medicine for a similar complaint, to write to your Medical
Establishment for some. You will bear in recollection, that I received of
you three distinct packages, and before I had finished the last, I found
myself completely recovered. I have now entered into the matrimonial
state, and have a son to crown my happiness.

Castle Gate, Norwich. Yours, with great esteem and regatd, T.F.



MESSRS. PERRY, Sv&oeons.

Worcester, July 6, 1836.
Dear Sirs,— A few months ago I called at your establishment for your
advice, when you recommended a coarse of the Balm of Syriacum. I am
at last, with much shame, induced to address you on the miserable
situation I was in, when I commenced taking your blessed Medicine. I
am convinced the disease I was afflicted with, was solely occasioned by m j
having contracted, in my early youth, a most infamous habit, the con-
tinual practice of which had totally destroyed my constitution.. The
health of my body was not only affected, but the powers of my mind were
much weakened; my judgment had lost its solidity, and my memory its
retentive faculties : my head was confused, and subject to frequent swim-
mings, and I was much troubled with an oppression at my chest which
occasioned a constant perspiration. I had pains in my stomach and
weakness and a general debility with constant yawning, and drowsiness ;
my appetite was ftuctuating, my spirits greatly depressed, so that at timet
I could scarcely refrain from sighing and involuntary weeping; my
eyes were inflamed and frequently emitted a watery humour; in a
word I was an object of misery. I paid strict attention to your advice,
and continued taking the Medicine according to your directions for
about three months. I am now perfectly recovered ; therefore I think it
not only my duty to acknowledge the service you have done me, but ta
inform the Public for the benefit of others, who labour under the same,.
Qi any disease similar to those firom which I am so ha^pil^ ceeov^xft^k.

J am, dear Sin, youi mott oVAis^^^'I'^k'^'^ ^^nvsX^ > .^-'V^



184 THE SILENT FRIEND.

CASE OP BIR. O. M.

Haring in my youth, I confess it with shame, committed the hein-
ous offence of Self-Pollution, I brought upon myself a running, which
neither the cold bath nor any thing that I was advised to apply, could
remoTe. Thus circumstanced, no one suspected me of labouring under
any bodily complaint but my Doctor, which I account for from my
being naturally robust, and always preserving my colour. At this crisis
I was induced to pay my addresses to a young lady of great personal «e»
complishments, and soon obtaining her consent, was united to her in flie
bands of wedlock. This I must acknowledge was highly impmdent in
me, who knew from my debilitated state, that I was utterly incapable
of consummating my nuptials. A seminal discharge always preceded «
perfect erection, which at first I was weak enough to attribute to a strong
desire of possession, but the same disappointment continuing, I had re*
course to drinking, which instead of remedying the evil, only inereaaed
it ; no kind of erection could I procure, and I positively emitted the eced
always before connection took place. The distress caused by my being
in this unfortunate predicament was greatly heightened by the fear that
my wife had dropped some hints to her mother of my incapacity for
matrimonial duty, and I looked on a divorce as inevitable, when I was
advised by a friend, whom I acquainted with my truly critical situation,
to purchase some bottles of your Cordial Balm of Syriacum. Perse-
verance ia taking this excellent medicine has given stamina to my consti-
tvtien, of which I thought my youthful exoeases had entirely bereft iti
in about five months it accomplished a cure, and it is with pleasure, I
now inform you, that my wife is pregnant with her first child, of whieb
I think I should never have been the father, had it not been for year pse-
eJoos medicine.



To MESSBS. PERRY &; Co, Buosons.

Dear Sirs, Coventry.

On the 20th of last month, I received from you the last box of medicine,
and have since punctually followed the directions it contained. I write
now to inform you that the medicine is nearly expended, and that for tiie
last month there has not been any appearance of venereal affection. The
only thing which now gives me uneasiness, is the continual weakness of
the seminal organ8„which appears to have increased. I must beg your eon-
sideration to my case, and have to inform you that I shall be obliged tt>
go abroad in the beginning of next week ; therefore pray have the good*
ness to send me medicine for as long a time as you can, and copious
directions for my guidance, both during the time it lasts, and afterwards.
I shall most probably be stationary, and at liberty to follow any plan of
jUring. Pnf let me koaw onder whit «liQ»iBlUaAM \ m»iXVa5n&«a« ^x



XH£ SILEKT FRIKND. 18^

diminish the dose of tiie Ck>rdial Balm of Syriacum, and what diet and
plan of li£e I must follow. However, I leave all this to you, not doubt-
ing that you will kindly feel for my situation, and wish to bring the
work you have taken in hand, and so ably carried on, to a happy
eoBclusion.

With many thanks for the kindness and attention you have shown me,
I am dear sirs, yours, sincerely and obliged, K.L.

[The above gentleman's case was one of the most complicated that ever
came under our knowledge ; the virile power had been nearly destroyed
by the effects of Onajiism— his habit was scorbutic, and he laboured un-
der an irritable gleet. He has since acquainted us by letter of his com-
plete recovery.]

To MESSRS. PERRY & Go. Subosoms.
Gtentlemen, Kilkenny.

I was sent to school not £ar from London, where I was very early initiat-
^ in the baneful practice of Self-pollution, which with shame I confiess
I have followed with very little interruption tiU a short time since, when 1,
fortunately for myself, saw your invaluable little Treatise. It was then
for the first time, (though I had before often suspected that I was not
doing right,) I became tvAlj sensible of the madness of my conduct, and
the certain misery I was entailing upon myself; and though I have now
determined never to recommence the practice, and do not think ray eas«
80 bad as very many of those you have cured, yet I do want some of
your assistance, and shall give you a short statement of my case. Mj
age is nearly twenty— I am thin and not tall— my habits are sedentary,
my manner of living regular, and my diet plain— I rise generally between
six and seven, breakfast at eight, dine at four, and have my tea at eight —
supper I hardly ever eat. I am not, thank God, now so much troubled
with nocturnal emissions, but the semen which I used to void in my
wretched praotiee', was aiwnys thin and watery, and I- found at last after
<me aot^ I had great difficulty in obtaining another. In the few connee*-
tilons L have had with women, I have always had emissions before I
wi^^hed it, and afterwards found myself unable to obtain a sufficient
erection, all desire being gone. On the whole I am afraid that I have
materially injured myself> and now I trust entirely to you for a cure.

I had forgotten to state, that for the last four or five days, I have been,
and am now still, troubled with pain in the right testicle, which I think
is rather swollen ; I am also troubled with a pain in my thigh, and under
part of the groin. These, I believe, are all the parts of my case. I enclose
you a note, and shall be glad to receive a letter of advice, and also some
medicine from you as soon as possible, and at the same time I will thank
you to let me know whether I shall be obliged to take any large quanti-
ties, and what the probable expense will be.

I am, gentlemen, your very obedient servant, Mc. C.

•«• Cored by a course of lilleasta. "Pextf * "Sl^dii^Sflasa.



186

r.l«E OF 3DL D. 3L, (V CHBOTEB.

^avA WM vsdK- :2/» Li=ii« of -i* ftrrt »« m ti»e »eie*te of pkysie.
«1>^<«^ *T*rT =-^.*i ▼rH!r»ia the «sBai>»t pralabililj of
ex^i \0i f'.iz^i. k=.4 »;pkr»-:;T tb? di«c!ue »»»«itipelT expelled; taf
the «:>-T:At>>3 «&« b-^t f'.r & m-jOM^t. and the di-(c«se tlieii letariMd
with <kfcb> fvr^. The Ti*rjT»: <c»>=>*«queace moltui^ fr>3tB the inet
ftearr of thf ranous iae:bod« adopted, and the riolent operation oi
astiiazent mmeral* irvi:irt!d an cker on the longs. Then die horron oi
exictence were experieaeed. a description of which would be an attempt
Tai^ue and inronf Lrtent : tho«e only who hare fielt that degree of nuseiy
can be «en«ible of it* effects.

During this period, mj dissolution was the only ol^ject <^ my prayen ;
when I received from a friend a pamphlet of Messrs. Perry's reeonunend-
ing their medicines, in which was pointed ont seTcral eases of a nature
similar to my own : throaj^ the importunity of my friend, and being eon-
seious 1 could not be in a worse situation, I sent to Messrs. Perry, and
went under a regfular course of their medicine, and in foor months, was
a<itoni«»hin?ly recovered.

[Mr. D. M. is entirely restored since the aboTe statement, and baa i«-
coramended the Medicines with that zeal which he is sensible they
merit]



To MESSRS. PERRY & CO.

Gentlemen,— With heartfelt gratitude, I return you sincere thanks, for
'the wonderful benefit I have experienced from your salutary advice and
hijjhiy valuable medicines. About three months since, having unfortu-
nately contracted the venereal disease, and not regarding it at the time
as anything material ; I at length, suddenly found myself plunged into
the deepest misery ; for I at last discovered that my body was impreg^
nated with that distressing disorder : such as nodes on my shin bones,
ulcerated throat, diseased nose, with pains in my head, and at last a
general debility and decay of the constitution ensued, and had I not per-
severed iu the use of your Medicines, death would have put an end to my
miHcrable existence long ere thLs. Happily for me, receiving one of your
publicaticms, I appKod at the Establishment, and you prescribed a course
of your Medicine (which to speak plainly, I put very little faith in, having
tried so many patent medicines in vain.) After taking one bottle at 33g. I
perceived little or no benefit ; however I did not despair, but continued to
proceed according to the directions, when to the great surprise of my
friends, and my own astonishment, In the course of a short time, dis-
covered wonderful improvement, and an entire alteration in my whole
person. Nothing could exceed my joy, as my prospects in life are great.
I eontinued the Medicine for two months, and was restored to health



THB SILEXTT FRIEND. 187

aiid«tniigtli, whleh I had long been* etnngerto; those unhappy per-
•008 who may be labouring under this destructiYe disease, should take
time to consider the dreadfid consequences arising therefrom, and make
Immediate application for your superior advice, and much esteemed
medicines. I remain, dear Sirs,

Norwich, Your eyer gratefiil and obliged, B, P.



Dear Sirs, Taunton, July, 1847.

I have much pleasure in stating that I have frequently used your Pre-
Tentative Lotion during the last few years, and have always found it
effectual in the prevention of disease. It is easy of use, and free from
oltoection— I have not found it, on any occasion, ta produce unpleasant
or iignrious consequencea.

Messrs. PERRY ft Go. I am, dear Sirs, yooi* obediently,

10. Bemers-at J.B.



Ctentlemttt, Edinburgh, April, 1647.

Sereral of my acquaintances who have tried your Preventative Lotion,
and assured me that it was completely effiBctual, and fally competent to
prevent all risk of infection. On this however I placed but little reliance,
having previously employed a,ll the means recommended by fiends with
out any beneficial result. I was, however, induced upon one occasion to .
give it a trial, and had reason to be so well satisfied with the result, that
I would not now be without a bottle of it on any account. I have several
times unfortunately caught a severe gonorrhea, which from a peculiarity
in my constitution, always produced the most frightful symptoms which
result from that disease. Since I ha?e used your Lotion I have en-
tirely escaped my fee, nor shall I in future entertain any dread of it.
With many thanks, gentlemen, for this great benefit,
Messrs. PERRY fc Co. I am, yours obliged,

1», Bemers-st. H. M. B.

Gentlemen, Bridgewater, May 19th, 1847.

Your Preventative Lotion is truly what its name purports it to be.
Having suffered previously on several occatums, from venereal infection,
I was readily induced, on the recommendation of a friend, to try it, and
I have hitherto found it most serviceable. Being of a rather free dis-
position, I am easily led into error, for which I used to pay very dearly,
having, as I have already said, suffered from many of the diseases so ably
described in your Silent Friend. Thanka to your Lotion, however, I hope
never to be placed in such a situation again.

Messrs. PERRY fc Co. I am, Gentlemen,

19, Bemers-st. Your obedient obU^d ««rvvQ&^



188 THE SILEITT F&IllTi).

Many persons wHohave imagined theniflelTea cured of
the venereal disease, have had the misfortune to find
the disease break out again six or seven years after-
wards. A proof of this h^pened in our practice the
other day. A gentleman was afflicted with the com-
plaint, and was cured as he thought by the advice and
prescription of an eminent surgeon. He afterwards
entered on the state of matrimony, four months after
which, he caught a violent cold, winch terminated in a
sore throat. At this crisis we were applied to, and
informed him that it proceeded from an old venereal
complaint. He then called in an appthecaiy, who
treated his complaint as a conunon sore throat, until he
became so bad, that he was compelled to call in a medi-
cal man, who confirmed the truth of what we had told
him, but too late for his recovery, so that he ftU a
sacrifice to his obstinacy. Persons^ therefore, should
be extremely cautious in causing the eradication of this
complaint, for which nothing is better than Messrs.
Perry's. Celebrated Medicines, which have justly
obtained credit as a remedy in this disease, and' are now
generally employed, particularly in the after oonse^
qumces. Whatever «tage of the complaint tibe patients
may be in, or whatever tiie mode of curing may con-
sist of, the Cordial Balm of Syriacum is evidently
one of the most efficacious and valuable additions to
venereal remedies that can possibly be adopted. It con-
tains the most valuable properties as a medicine in
these diseases we could wish for ; an alterative, anti-
venereal, and stimulating diaphoretic, it conveys its
active principles throughout the body, penetrating even
the minutest vessels, removing all corruptions, con-
taminations and impurities from the vital stream,
searching out the morbid virus, and radically expelling
it through the skin^



THS 8ILSMT FRIEND^ 189



NOTICE TO PATIENTS.



For a long series of years past a great portion of our
practice has been carried on in Epistolary Corres-
pondence. Since, however, the alteration in the post*
age regulations, the number of the correspondents have
increased many fold. It will be apparent with what
facility advice can be sought for, and obtained within
a few hours, thus advantaging alike persons abroad and
at home. By the present postage arrangements, dis-
tance is no hindrance or additional expense to invalids
resident in the Highlands, the limits of the Welsh
mountains, the Eastern Coast, or at the Land's End ;
and by them alto some of the severest infirmities of
mental and physical life can be revealed aifd assuaged.
We have alluded to the diffidence besettii^ individua]^
suffering under many of the calamities enumerated,
the diffidence that induces them to bear the ilia they
have, rather than, with a view to their relief or mitiga-
tion, take into their confidence a professional neighbour,
or even a relative or fiiend;. and we lunn|( adduced
the foregoing cases to shew with what pronqpAness and
quietude the difficulties may be overcome, and what
probable success may follow. Letters may be signed
A. B., or by any other initials, and will meet with
prompt attention, as in all professional engagements,
the most inviolable secresy may be relied on.



190 THE SILEHT FBISHD.

We are ftillj assured that mucli good lias been effected
by persons possessed of philanthropic feelings, who have
become purchasers of this work, in order to distribute
it casual] J among thoae parties who are acquainted with
a large circle of friends ; who, in like manner after
perusing the same, have forwarded it anonymously or
otherwise, to other individuals within the range of
their acquaintance ; so that extended publicity is the
result which has been, and daily is the means of rescu-
ing hundreds of imhappy yictuns of weakness and in*
discretion, from the must bitter anguish, and «**r*'^fT>
premature dissolution.

All oonunoiueatioiis uid oxden mie leqaated to be fi>rwaided to ib»
LONDON E8TABUSHMSNT.



MESSRS. PERRY & Co.

MAT BB PBBSONALLT COM8ULTBD AT THEIl

ESTABLISBMBNT,

19- BERNERS STREET OXFORD STREET

LONDON,

PUNCTUALLT FBOM ELBYBN TILL TWO AND FIYB

TILL EIGHT, DAILY,

AND ON SUNDATS FBOM BLEVBN TILL ONB;

IT IS irCCESSABT TO 0B8EBVE THAT

ONLY ONE PERSONAL VISIT IS REQUIRED

FROM A COUNTRY PATIENT.



ME88R8. R. & L PERRY & GO'S MEDICINES

MAT BE HAD OF TUBIB YOLLOWINO AOBNTS, ALL OV WHOM ABB PATBBT
MBBICINB TBKDBBS, AND OF WHOM MAT BB HAD THB SILENT FRIEND.



LONDON AGENTS.

Barclay and Sons, Farringdon-street

W. Sutton and Co., 10, Bow Church'^ard

W. Edwards, 67, St. PauTs Church-yard

S. Sanger, 150, Oxfo/rd-street

Hannaj and Dietrichsen, 63, Oxford^street

Butler and Harding, 4, CheapHde

R. Johnson, 68, Comhill

W. Strange, 21, Paternoster Row

Simpkin, Marshall and Co., Stationers HaU Court, Ave

Maria Lane.
Kent and Richards, Paternoster Row.



COUNTRY AGENTS.

Aberdeen. — G^ Reid and Son, Druggists, Union-street
Alloa. — Irvine, Druggist
Arbroath. — ^W. Baird, Guide Office
Armagh. — Thompson, Guardian Office
Athlone. — Gilchrist, Apothecary
Andover. — J. Dyson, Chemist, High-street
Ashford. — J. Farmer, Chemist
Aylesbury. — E. D. Lines, Chemist

BalUna. — ^W. Richey, Tyrawley Herald Office
Bally shannon. — Carter, Herald Office
Banbury. — J. B. Austin, Chemist
Barnstaple. — ^W. Avery, Journal Office
Bangor f N, Wales. — J. Bro^m, C\«om^^ O^^^



MESSRS. perry's AGENTS.



Basingstoke. — R. S. Hulbert, Chemist, Church-street
Battle. — B. B. Stedman, Chemist
Bath. — Meyler and Son, Herald Office

J. and J. Keene, Journal Office

Bamsley. — Richard Pybus, Bookseller, Market Place
Belfast. — ^W. Marshall and Co., High-street

C. Mc. Allister, Apothecary, High-street

Bedford. — C. Corrie, Chemist

Booking. — E. Pearse, Chemist

Berwick'On- Tweed. — J. Davidson, Chemist

Beverley. — ^W. B. Johnson, Bookseller, MaikieC Place

Blackburn. — James Grime, Chemist

Blandford. — S. Groves, Chemist

BoUon. — Bradbury and Son, Booksellers

James Scowcroft, Chemist

Bodmin, — I. S. D. Pearce, Chemist, Fore-street.
Boston. — J. Noble, Bookseller, Market-place
Bradford. — J. Pratt, Chemist, Ivegate

F. Remmington, Chemist, Ivegate

Braintree. — Thomas Jull, Chemist

Brecon, S. Wales, — E. Ward, Chemist

Bristol, — Ferris and Score, Druggists, Union-street

Dowling, Chemist, High-street

Birmingham, — H. Winnall, Bookseller

— ' J. Guest, Bookseller

Bideford, — ^W. Cole, Bookseller, Allhalland-street
Brighton. — Richard Noakes, Chemist
Bridgend. — Philip Price, Post Office
Bridlington. — ^John Turby, Bookseller

Rayner and Cooper, Chemists

Bromley. — J. B. Shillcock, Chemist
Burton. — ^W. Wesley, Bookseller, High-street
Bury St. Edmunds, — G. Thompson, Bookseller
Bury, Lancashire, — ^W. Warhurst, Chemist

Cambridge, — ^W. H. Smith, Chemist, Crescent

^W. S. Hobbs, Chemist, Bridge-street

Canterbury. — Cottrell and Paine, Chemists, St. Mar-
garet-street
Carlisle. — J. F. Whitridge, Bookseller
Cardiff,— R, Webber, Guardian Office
Cardigan, — ^W. Williams, Chemisti High-atieet



MB86B8. PXBBT's AOBNT8.



Carmarthen. — J. W. White, Chemist, Guildhall Square
Carnarvon, — Robert Griffilh, Chemist, High-street
Chatham, — Forster, Chemist, High-street
Chelmsford, — Meggy and Chalk, Essex Herald Office
Cheltenham, — D. Gibbon, Chemist, 109, High-street
Chipping Norton. — I. H. Stephan, Chemist
Chipping Sodbury, — ^W. Pearce, Chemist

J. Miller, Chemist

Cirencester. — R. & W. Smilii, Chemists

Coggeshall, — ^W. L. Oliver, Chemist

Colchester, — T. Smith, Chemist, High-street

Conway^ N. Wales. — ^T. A. Roberts, Chemist

Cork. — Bolster and Co., Booksellers, St. Patrick-street

Clonmel. — ^Alderman Hacket, Bookseller, Main-street

Corsham. — John Stantial, Chemist

Coventry. — H. Merridew, Herald Office

C. A. Rollason, Bookseller, High-street.

Crewkeme. — J. & W. Pearce, Chemists, Sheep-market
Cupar. — J. Smith, Bookseller and Druggist



Deal. — £. Moore, Chemist, Beach-street

Denbeigh. — ^W. Edwards, Chemist

Derby, — T. Burroughs, Mercury Office

Devizes, — N. B. Randle, Bookseller, Market-place

R. Hayward, Chemist, St. John-street

Devonport. — ^Byers and Son, Independent Office
D. May, Printer, Winterbury-street

Doncaster. — Brook and Co., Grazette Office

Dorchester. — G. Simmonds, County Chronicle Office

Dorking. — Ede and Co., Chemists

Douglas^ Isle of Man. — R. G. Kelley, Chemist, West-
street

Dover. — Forster, Chemist, Adrian-street

Drogheda. — Kelly, Bookseller, West-street

Dublin. — J. H. Powell, Bookseller, 10, Westmoreland-
street

Dundee. — ^James Drmnmond, Chemist, Overgate

Dunmow. — ^W. Piper, Chemist

Durham.^ Brown and Co., Chemists

J. H. Veitch, Chronicle Office

Edinburgh. — ^J. & R. Raimea and Co^T^ro^^^giai^^^VsAi^
Walk



' • i



MESSRS. FBBBY*S AOS^NTS.

Edinburgh, — R. Lindsay, CJ^emist, 11, Elm Row .
Egham, — J, W. Tanner, Chemist
Elgin. — D. Mc Bean, Chemist ••

Exeter. — James Fitze, Bookseller \

Enniakitten, — H. Beavan, Chronicle Office

Falkirk. — Mr, Murdock, Druggist
Folkstone. — Richard Hammon, Chemist
Frome. — ^W. C» Brandy Chemist, Market-place

Oktsgow.-^D. Campbell, Bookseller and Druggist, 1311,
Argyll-street . = •

Gloucester. — CHfTe and Co., Chronicle Office
Ooole. — D. Cass, Chemist, Dire-street
Gravesend. — Mr. Reid, Chemist

Independent Office ...

Greenwich, — T. Riches, Chemist, London-street

Halifax. — X^eyland and Son, Booksellers, Com Market
Halstead.-^-K. Skitter, Chemist

Hanley. — T. Allbut and Son, Booksellers, Market-filace
Harrowgate, — Richardson and Son, Chemists
Hastings. — H. C. Led, Chemist, High-street
Haverfordy East. — O. E. Davies, Chemist,

Joseph Potter, Herald Office

Haverhill. — Charles Kitehing, Chemist
Hereford. — ^Draper, Chemist, Broad-street
Holyhead. — ^H. G. Hughes^ Qiemist
Honiton. — T* E. Creak, Chemist
Horsham. — B. Neeves, Chemist, West-street
Hull. — M. Noble, Bookseller, Market-place
— » ^W. Bettison, Advertiser Office

Uminster. — G. L. Williams, Chemist, Silver-street
Ipswich. — ^W. Silver^ton, Chemist, St. Nicholas-street
Inverness. — L. Mackintosh, 8, Church-street

Jersey. — Chadwick Le Lievre, Constitutional Office

Keighley. — T. D. Hundson, Chemist, High-street
Kendal. — ^W. Tindall, Strickland-gate
Kidderminster. — Penuell and Mark* Booksellers^ High-
street



ltX88B8. PXBBT'8 A0EKT8.

JSTffi^Atofi.-^W. B. Jones, Chemist
Kingstown, — H. O'Connor, 77, George-street
KiUenaule, — D. O'Reilly, Apothecary
Knaresborvugh, — ^John Acombe, Chemist, Market-pbee

M. Seeting, Chemist, High-street

Lancaster. — ^A. Milner, Guardian Office

Ledbury. — James Gibbs, jun., Printer and Stationer

Leeds. — ^J. Heaton, Bookseller, 7, Briggate

Leicester, — Thomas Woodward, Chemist, Hay Market

Leominster, — ^James Chillcott, Bookseller, Broad-street

Lewes. — H. Saxby, Chemist, High-street

Limerick. — Byfield and Co., Apothecarie8» 132, George*

street
Lincoln. — ^J. Drury, Bookseller, High-street
Liverpool. — J. Priestly, Chemist, 25, Lord^street
W . Rawle, Chemist, 17, Church-street



-T. Newton, Bookseller, Church-street



Londonderry, — J. H. B^ywe, Apothecary, Ferryquay-st*
Loughborough, — ^J. Adams, Chemist, Market-place
Lyme Regis, — ^Edward Thornton, Chemist, Broad-street
Lynn, — ^Thew and Son, Adyertiser Office

Macclesfield, — ^W. Ryder, Bookseller and Druggisf,

Mill-street
Maidstone, — Mares, Agles, and Co., Druggists, Bank*

street
MdUon. — J. Wrangham, Chemist, Wheelgate

R. Jefferson, Chemist, Market-place

Manchester, — R. H. Ingham, Chemist, Market-place

Margate. — ^J. Gaskell, Chemist

Marlborough. — Emberlln and Harrold, Chemists, High*

street
Merthyr Tydvil. — ^Thomas Stephens, Chemist, High-st.
^- ^Walter Thomas, Chemist, Opposite

the Angel
Midhurst, — G. Wolferstan, Chemist
Monmouth, — T. Farror, Beacon Office
Montrose. — ^Andrew Kerr, Perfumer

Newark, — ^James Bridges, Bookseller

Newhury. — John Sainaburyt CAMiin^l&»itA\-'$M^



MESSRS. perry's AGENTS.



New Cross. — L. Hill, Chemist

Newcastle-on-Tyne, — J. Blackwell and Co., Courant

Office
Newport. — Phillips, Chemist, High-street

— '■ E. V. Jenkins, Chemist, Commercial-street .

Newport^ Isle of Wight. — H. Cory, Chemist

Newry^ Ireland. — S. Baillie, Apothecary

Newtown. — John Moore, Chemist, Broad-street

Northallerton. — C. L^gdale, Chemist

Northampton. — G. Barry, Chemist

Norwich. — Stevenson and Matchett, Norfolk Chronicle

Office
Nottingham. — R. Sutton, Review Office

Oxford. — H. Slatter, Chemist, High* street
Orkney. — G. Garreach, Stromnep

Pembroke. — R. C. Treweeks, Chemist

Penzance. — ^I. Proctor, Chemist

Perth.— J ajaes Gowans, Apothecary

Peterborough. — Clark, Stationer

Petworth. — J. G. Walker, Chemist

Plymouth. — Nettleton and Co., Herald Office

Portsmouth. — Padwick, Chemist, High-street

Portsea. — Thomas Baltman, Druggist, 3, Camden Alley

Preston. — J. Walker, Bookseller

Poole.— 1. T. Allen, Chemist, 106, High-street

Ramsgate. — J. R. Cousins, Chemist, 57, High-street

Reading. — S. Poulton, Chemist

Rochester. — R. Jetferys, Chemist

Rochford. — ^A. Harrington, Chemist

Romford. — J. Thurlby, Chemist, High-street

Ringwood. — ^W. Wheaton, Bookseller

Ryde, Isle of Wight.~A. Ellis, Chemist

Rye.' — Charles West, Chemist

Roscommon. — Charles TuHy, Journal Office

Saffron Walden. — ^J. Mill9r» Chemist
Salisbury. — Brodie aud Co., Journal Office

R. Farrant, Chemist, Market-piace

Sandmkh. — ^John Knowles, Chemist, Haxnet-street



nssRs. peeby's agents.

Sheeme88.''^J . Fife, CHemist

Sheffield.— A Whitaker, Bookseller, 22 and 27, Fargate

Shaftesbury. — G. M. and D. Roberts, jun., Booksellers,

High-street
Shepton MaUett. — ^B. Ellis, Chemist, High-street
Sherborne. — Longman and Co., Chemists, Cheap-street
Shrewsbury, — John Watton, Chronicle Office
Sidmouth. — John Harvey, Bookseller, Fore-street
Sittingboume. — P. W. Gordelier, Chemist
Sligo. — Champion Office
Southampton. — F. Vinen, Chemist, High-street
South Moulton. — ^A. Tepper, Bookseller
Stafford. — R. and W. Wright, Druggists
St. Day, — ^J. Corfield, Chemist
St. Austell.-— Vf. H. Hem, Chemist
Stanford. — S. Sharp, Chemist

Robert Bagley, Bookseller, Ironmonger-st.

Steyning. — H. Wolferstan, Chemist, High-street
St. NeotSf Cornwall. — Sharp and Co, Chemists.
Stonehouse. — £. W. Cole, Bookseller, Edgcumbe-street
Stoney Stratford. — James Howe, Chemist
Stockport. — Fowler, Chemist, Bridge-street
StoJcesley. — R. Calvert, Chemist, Market-place
Stirling. — M. Kirkwood, Druggist
Stroud. — T. Tombs, Chemist, King-street
Sunderland. — ^Vint and Carr. Herald Office
Swansea. — Thomas Evans, Chemist, High-street
Strood. — C. Martin, Chemist

Taunton. — Hitchcock and Son, Chemists, North-street
Trowbridge. — Henry Dyer, Chemist, Comer of Church

Yard
Truro, — H. D. Martin, Chemist
Tunbridge Wells. — James Allday, Chemist, Mount

Ephraim

Ulverstone. — John Jackson

Wakefield, — F. Cardwell, Chemist, Bread-street
Warminster, — ^W. H. Taylor, Bookseller, Market-place
Warwick. — M. Heathcote, Bookseller, Market-^lajiA.
Water/ord. — KiMea, C1itom<d<& Oifikss.^



MBMBS. PEBBT*8 AOBNT8*

WeHbury. — S. Taylor, Chemist, Market-place

Whitehaven, — ^R. Gibson, Chemist

Windsor, — S. Smith, Chemist

Wincanion, — ^Thomas Phillips, Chemist, Market-place

Winchester* — Jacob and Johnson, Chronicle Office

Wolverhampton, — Mander, Weaver, and Co,, Druggists

W . Parke, Bookseller, High-street
Woolwich. — Thomas Parkes, Chemist
Worcester, — Deighton, Journal Office
Worksop, — S. Sisson, Bookseller
Wrexham, — John Beale, Chemist, High-street

Yeovil,-— G, Harvey, Chemist, Borough

York, — ^Bolton, Blanshard, and Cb., Druggists, Mickle-

gate
Yoatfard, — R. F. Martin, Chemist



W. Wftttoti k Co. Vrinim, «^, t^\\\w«Mt««t.
