It were needless to expatiate more upon the dangers peculiar to masturbation; they are but too real, and too well demonstrated.

ON ONANISM, AS A CAUSE OF SEXUAL DEBILITY.

This destructive habit, as the most frequent cause of impotency and sterility, claims our first consideration. —Manustrapsio, Onanism, the sin of Onan. It may be defined, the discharge of the semen from a preternatural stimulus; the habit, it is said, of the solitary monk and recluse, as well as of inconsiderate youth, and of those whose riper years, it might naturally be expected and hoped, would prevent their guilty indulgence in an offence so severely denounced in the Scriptures, and in itself so revolting to every sentiment of manhood. It is a practice of the most destructive tendency, pregnant with mental and physical evils, notwithstanding the assertions that have been made to the contrary by some authors. The concurrent testimonies of all writers on the subject (with the exception just alluded to) amply illustrate its baneful consequences. Hippocrates, in his works, notices it: Celsus also, in his book on the Preservation of Health, remarks, "These habits are always hurtful to weak people, and the frequent indulgence in them weakens those of the strongest constitution." Aetius gives a dreadful picture of their evils:—"Young people (says he) have the air and appearance of old age; they become pale, effeminate, lazy, benumbed, base, stupid, and even imbecile; they have an utter distaste for everything, are totally incapacited, and many become paralytic" Galen, also, mentions similar evils as resulting from this destructive habit. Hoffman says, "After frequent nocturnal pollutions, not only the powers are lost, the body falls away, and the face turns pale; but, moreover, the memory fails, a cold sensation seizes all the limbs, the sight is clouded, and the voice becomes hoarse; all the body languishes by degrees; disturbing dreams prevent sleep administering any relief." Boerhaave remarks that " The loss of too much semen occasions lassitude, debilitates, and renders exercise difficult; it causes convulsions, emaciation and pains in the membrane of the brain; it deadens the senses, and particularly the sight. I have seen (he continues) a patient whose disorder began by lassitude, and a weakness in all parts of the body, particularly towards the loins; it was attended with an involuntary motion of the tendons, periodical spasms, and bodily decay, insomuch as to destroy the whole corporeal frame." Mr. Ludwig, in describing the evils flowing from too copious evacuations of any kind, says, " Young people of either sex, who devote themselves to lasciviousness, destroy their health in dissipating those powers which were destined to bring their bodies to their greatest degree of vigour, and they at length fall into consumptions." Mr. Klookof, in his work on disorders of the mind relative to fhe body, observes, " Too great a dissipation of the semen weakens the spring of the solid parts; hence arise weakness, laziness, phthisis, dorsal consumptions, numbness, and a deprivation of the senses, stupidity, madness, fainting and convulsions." The most clouded melancholy, indifference (might one not say even aversion ?) for all pleasures, the impossibility of sharing in the conversation of company, wherein they are always absent; the thought of their own unhappiness, the despair which arises from considering themselves as the architects of their own misery, and the necessity of renouncing the felicities of marriage, are the fluctuating ideas which compel these miserable objects to sequester themselves from the world, and happy are those who do not put a finishing hand to their existence.selves, even to the close observer and experienced practitioner; requiring the utmost knowledge to surmount, assuming so many shapes, the malignancy and virulence of the contagion varying according to the constitution of the patient; the time the insidious poison has been lurking in the system, &c &c, thus showing the necessity of adopting a mode of treatment according to the nature of the case.





Another powerful inducement to its practice is the secrecy and apparent impunity with which it may be indulged in, and there we find the fruitful source of its gigantic evil—the continued repetition of the act; but those who think thus should recollect that there is a Supreme Being, from whose searching eye nothing is concealed—nay, we also tell them, that even to the eye of man shall their guilt and shame be revealed, by their sunken countenances, lusterless eyes, and attenuated frames.

Having now described the dreadful effects resulting from the practice of self-pollution, we shall now enter upon the

METHOD OF TREATMENT AND CURE:

and, in the first place must observe, that before any remedy can be administered with any prospect of success, the patient must determine on abstaining entirely from the practice of this heinous crime, this abominable sin, condemned by God and man; and here we may observe, that this in general is the most difficult point to get over, for when it is habitual it holds such a powerful sway over the mind, that the most deter





mined mental energy is required to overcome this dreadful propensity.

Let Reason then resume her seat, and become a convert to chastity and honour, for the debility of nature can be completely reinstated by the celebrated

CORDIAL BALM OF ZEYLANICA,

Sold in Bottles at 1 Is. each, or four quantities in one Family Bottle for 33s. by which one lis. Bottle is saved.

PREPARED ONLY BY

R. J. BRODIE AND CO., SURGEONS,

4, Great Charles-street, four doors from Easy-Sow,

Birmingham.



MESSRS. BRODIE EXPECT WHEN CONSULTED PERSONALLY

OR BY LETTER, THE USUAL FEE OF ONE POUND,

LETTERS MUST BE PREPAID.

Patients are requested to be as minute as possible in the detail of their cases,—as to the duration of the complaint, the symptoms, age, habit of living, and general occupation.



MESSRS. BRODIE AND CO.,

MAY BE PERSONALLY CONSULTED AT THEIR

ESTABLISHMENT,



No. A, GREAT CHARLES-STREET,

FOUR DOORS FROM EASY-ROW,

BIRMINGHAM,

PUNCTUALLY FROM ELEVEN IN THE MORNING UNTIL

EIGHT IN THE EVENING,

AND ON SUNDAYS FROM ELEVEN TILL ONE.





Some disorders have been many years in proceeding to such a degree of malignancy as cannot be eradicated in a few weeks; therefore it is in order to encou rage steady perseverance in the use of proper means, that Messrs. Brodie have adopted the plan of packing into boxes, THREE LARGE BOTTLES, containing the quantity of twelve at lis. for Five Pounds, by which £1. 12s. are saved.

Those who wish to have the £5. cases of medicine direct from Messrs. Brodie, can (as the most safe way of remittance) obtain a Post Office order for £5., or any sum under that amount; or, if more convenient, the money may be enclosed in a letter, and upon payment of one shilling at the Post Office, the same will be registered, so that persons sending any amount will be indemnified against loss.

Patients who correspond with Messrs. Brodie, should always preserve the same signature to prevent trouble and delay, as the letters are carefully arranged alphabetically, and must be examined previous to any medicine being prepared; and this is important, not only to the patient's recovery, but to facilitate and expedite the process of the medicine intended to be sent, as reference must be had to the former letters upon every occasion.





PART II.



PRACTICAL OBSERVATIONS

ON

SYPHILITIC INFECTION

IN ALL ITS STAGES,

EMBRACING REMARKS ON THE TREATMENT OF GONORRHOEA,

GLEETS, SYPHILIS, SECONDARY SYMPTOMS,

AND STRICTURES.

WITH INTERESTING RBMARKS OCCURBING IN A MOST EXTENSIVE

PRACTICE, AND OBSERVATIONS



ON THE ABUSE OF MERCURY.



The ravages and miseries this class of diseases have caused in every part of the world is too well known to require our entering into a minute detail, but, unfortunately, many do not give the subject any consideration, but rush headlong into all kinds of excesses, unmindful of the direful consequences which are too often the results upon the health, the reproductive functions, and on life itself.

Cases are daily submitted to our attention showing the rapid inroads these diseases make upon the constitution, when unchecked or injudiciously treated; for a variety of obstacles and difficulties present them





It is impossible to imagine what sufferings may be entailed, by the parent on the offspring, if the system is not thoroughly purified; at the same time causing the unhappiness of her with whom he has linked his fate. There have been instances in our practice of persons with gonorrhoea who have thought themselves cured, having merely a thin watery discharge from the urethra (and that very slightly,) infecting his wife, thus creating a catalogue of woes in his domestic circle, begetting children who inherit the germ of disease from the parent. Instances could be quoted of women giving birth to six or eight infants in rapid succession, born dead and decomposed, in consequence of ill cured syphilis in the father; it is, therefore, highly criminal for any man to marry, if the system is not completely purified of infection—for if this is not observed, and if he even has children, they are very likely to come into the world a spectacle to all beholders, subject to the evil and eruptions of the most inveterate tendency; thus many families inherit various maladies arising from impure blood, scrofulous or venereal taint, assuming so many appearances that the greatest discrimination is necessary to detect its presence,—at one time affecting the skin, particularly the





head and face, with eruptions and ulcers; at another period producing the most violent pains in the limbs and bones, which is frequently mistaken for rheumatism; thus the whole frame becomes debilitated and decays, and a lingering death puts a period to their dreadful sufferings.

Notwithstanding the improvement in the mode of treating this malady, it is a disorder of so penetrating and malignant a nature, that it is requisite to watch it through all its stages with the utmost attention; the insidious and pernicious influence of the venereal virus must be counteracted with prompitude by efficient medicines, that will lead to those results so much to be desired, without endangering the constitution.

It is no reflection on the knowledge or judgement of the members of the profession in general to say, they have very seldom an opportunity of having that experience in diseases arising from venereal excesses, or originating in disorganization of the reproductive organs, in consequence of their attention being drawn to the numerous diseases the human frame is incident to. Neither do we arrogate to ourselves superior endowments by stating that, in consequence of an extensive practice of many years in a particular branch of the profession, we are enabled to offer to those requiring our aid the advantages we have obtained by practical knowledge of these diseases.

Without any more preface we shall now enter more minutely into a description of the different form syphilis assumes, in as concise, clear, and intelligible manner as possible.

The Venereal Disease may be divided into different classes, according to the appearances it assumes afte sexual intercourse; for instance, Gonorrhoea ;—an inflammation of the Urethra, producing a discharge of a white, yellow, or green matter.—A peculiar ulcer, seated on the glans, prepuce, or body of the penis, is called a chancre.—A swelling of the groin bubo, and the more serious cases arising from the latter are called Secondary Symptoms.





GONORRHCEA.

A person may be infected with Gonorrhoea, the third or sixth day after impure connexion; but sometimes it does not appear until the expiration of ten or fifteen days.—At the onset, a sense of heat, or itching is experienced in the orifice of the urethra;—in the course of a day or two, this sensation becomes intolerable, —particularly when voiding urine, when a burning heat is experienced;—inflammation takes place; and, if not speedily subdued at the commencement may extend along the whole of the tube to the bladder. The stream of urine is then observed to be diminished in size; instead of passing in one continual stream, it becomes forked—is voided with the greatest difficulty in very small quantities; a slight white, yellow, or green discharge issues from the urethra, accompanied by painful erections of the penis, when the patient gets warm in bed.

If, from false delicacy, or any other cause the person neglects to have proper advice, all those symptoms soon become aggravated; pains are experienced in the groiu, .testicles or scrotum, and very much increased





on evacuating the bladder or bowels. Now the discharge is increased—it stains the linen ;—a frequent desire is felt to make water, and which is not passed without the most excruciating burning pain; the glans penis becomes swollen, the testicles are painful, and sometimes so sensitive as to require a suspensory bandage to support them. The erections of the penis become constant,—particularly at night—very painful, and curved,—constituting what is termed a chordee.

Sometimes by improper treatment, or persons tampering with themselves, the discharge ceases suddenly, or is very slight, without the inflammation being subdued; then one, or both testicles become swollen, extremely painful and inflamed, causing frequently disorganization of the reproductive powers, and incurable sterility and impotency.

Sometimes inflammation of the prepuce or foreskin ensues, so that it cannot be drawn back; the disease is then termed Phymosis. Then again the prepuce may become contracted by inflammation,—is drawn back for some purpose or another, is called Paraphymosis. If this is not quickly remedied, the inflammation is considerably increased—sloughing of both the glans and the prepuce follows; but if immediate attention is paid to the case, and it is judiciously treated, this alarming state may be easily cured ; but where adhesion has taken place, or ulceration exists, it will be more difficult to subdue; the adhesions must be seperated, orthe stricture divided with the scalpel. Instances have occurred in the course of our practice, in cases of Phymosis and Puraplrymosis, where sloughing and ulceration have taken place through neglect, and more or less destruction of the penis followed. We, therefore, wish to impress on our readers the neceessity of the utmost attention, prompitude, and care, to prevent the most serious consequences following in cases of this kind.





The Purifying Vegetable Fills are the most safe and certain remedy, and if taken according to the directions a speedy and sure cure will be effected without the slightest fear of the disorder returning, provided the patient continues to take them some little time after all symptoms have disappeared.

The efficacy of the Purifying Vegetable Pills are too well known to require comment, but it will not he out of place here to state, they having been used with every success during our extensive practice we can with every pleasure and confidence recommend them, the more particularly as they require no restraint to the man of business or pleasure, and will prevent the fatal consequences hourly arising from the unskilful treatment of Practitioners generally. . One of the results of an ill-cured gonorrhoea is a thin watery discharge from the urethra, termed gleet. Intemperance increases the discharge, and if continued, and the patient neglects to have the disease removed, the constant waste will exhaust his strength, and eventually destroy the bodily faculties. Stricture of the urethra may also arise from a long continued gleet. The medicines that are salutary in these cases are those that have a direct influence on the mucous membranes; namely the Cordial Balm Of Zbylanica and Purifying Vegetable Pills. When gleet arises from gonorrhoea, it is necessary the patient should be





aware that the disease may be conveyed to another in the act of coition. A gleet sometimes arises from other causes—it may originate from nervous debility or seminal weakness, brought on by that solitary and pernicious habit, Onanism, or it may be symptomatic of a diseased prostrate gland or stricture.

Another evil that may arise during the progress of Gonorrhoea is an enlargement of the glands of one or both groins; these are termed Sympathetic Buboes > and are very different from those appearing after chancre. A gonorrhceal bubo is of little consequence, if judiciously treated. The absolute necessity of proper advice in those cases must be very evident; for the ignorant pretender may easily mistake a syphilitic for a gonorrhceal bubo, each requiring very opposite treatment.

It is most essential that cleanliness should be observed during the progress of Gonorrhoea, washing the parts frequently with warm water: for the discharge is so acrimonious, that it will fret the skin, if allowed to accumulate; and frequent ablutions assist very much in subduing the inflammation, and preventing the results of phymosis or paraphymosis, which have been already described.

In the first stages of the disease, the diet should be mild and nutritious, avoiding higly-seasoned dishes, and every thing that will excite or increase inflammation; therefore wines and spirituous liquors should be refrained from: much benefit will be experienced from the use of linseed tea, barley-water, other mucilaginous drinks, as they diminish the acrimony of the urine, and render it less stimulating to the inflamed urethra ,





however, when the inflammation is subdued, there will not be that necessity for a strict observance in regard of diet; yet temperance must be observed, and excess of every kind avoided; for the cure will be retarded, and the symptoms aggravated, by sensual indulgences of every description.

STRICTURE.

Stricture of the Urethra is often caused by unskilful treatment of gonorrhoea, masturbation, long retention of urine, sedentary habits, excessive indulgence of the passions. When the orifice of the urethra is contracted by structural disorganization, it is termed permanent; when by some spasmodic contraction, it is temporary.

Spasmodic Stricture very frequently arises from Gleet or Gonorrhoea imperfectly or only partially cured. The young man fancying himself nearly well is tempted to join his companions in some carousal; the conviviality of the evening, the hilarity of the party, leads him on from glass to glass, until he has scarcely power to retain his water—but still persists in refusing to answer the calls of nature. At length he leaves the warm room for the cold night air, and finds himself unable to void a drop of urine without the greatest difficulty, and perhaps after every effort and the most excruciating agony, he finds it utterly impossible. The most alarming consequences may ensue if immediate relief is not obtained; no time therefore should be lost in using •the Cordial Balm Op Zeylanica which will cause an immediate flow of the urine, when the irritation of the urethra will be removed, and he will recover from the attack.





But Permanent Stricture is not so easily subdued— it attacks every part of the urethra from the uttermost extremity to the very root of the penis. The orifice of the canal is diminished sometimes to thtat extent, that the finest probe cannot be introduced; retention of urine ensues, ulceration follows, and most fatal are the results if not controlled with the utmost tact and skill.

Permanent Stricture approaches so imperceptibly, that persons are frequently not aware of its presence until it is to firmly established. For a very long period he may be suffering from gleet—the disease progresses; on rising in the morning he perceives a glutinous substance covering the orifice and nut of the penis, arising from the discharge from the diseased parts; the urine flows in a forked or double stream and then as the accumulated matter is dissolved it becomes natural.

When Stricture is allowed to continue, it prevents in a greater or less degree the seminal emission, forcing it backwards into the bladder, thus rendering the individual sterile and disqualified from entering into the matrimonial state; thus, persons in the prime of life, and in all other respeets well qualified, refuse to form conjugal engagements, are driven to despair, and too often abandon themselves to dissipation and ruin.

Notwithstanding the dangers arising from these diseases, they may be subdued when treated in a proper manner; in fact, there should be no delay in those cases, every method adopted, without the loss of time.'remove every vestige of the malady, thereby preventing a host of evils and a deal of suffering, mental as well as bodily.





SYPHILIS OR POX, AND SECONDARY

SYMPTOMS.

Syphilis, or Pox, is another and more violent form of the Venereal Disease, and is divided into two forms, the primary and secondary. The former consists of a chancre or ulcer, which forms on the foreskin and nut of the penis, of an irritated and red appearance, which gradually spreads, and if not speedily arrested, ends in the total destruction of the penis. After the disease has appeared in the form of a chancre, in a few days a bubo or abscess of the groin follows, which inflames, enlarges, and suppurates or bursts, when a quantity of matter escapes; and, in severe cases, instances have occurred where the abscess has extended to deep parts and exposed the femoral artery, which is ulcerated, and the patient has lost his life from haemorrhage. When the disease is uninterrupted, the constitution becomes affected, and hence arise what are called secondary symptoms, which at first affect the nose and throat, secondly the akin and the surface of the body, and lastly the bones.

When the venereal virus attacks the throat or palate, the membrane of the roof of the mouth becomes red and inflamed, a pimple forms upon it, which opens, ulcerates, and exposes the bony palate, which may be felt by the probe; this is the first stage. The exposed bone soon exfoliates, and communication is thereby formed between the mouth and nose, the fluids return through it, the voice is changed into a nasal twang, and a most offensive discharge is secreted.





When the tonsil glands are attacked, ulcers appear precisely similar in character to chancres—hollow in the centre, with raised ragged edges, yellow on the surface, with a livid colour on the surrounding margin. A sense of dryness is perceived, extending up the Eustachian tube to the ear. Sometimes the tongue is attacked. Extending its course, it next attacks the larynx, or top of the windpipe, when if not arrested it will soon destroy life. Attending this affection of the larynx, there is always loss of voice; the patient speaks in a low whisper. It is more fatal than any other form of the venereal disease.

The mucous membrane of the nose stands next in order, as subject to the influence of Syphilis. The





patient's attention is first directed to it by an incrustation which forms in the nostril. On this being removed,a quantity of blood mixed with purulent matter is discharged, which frequently lays bare the bone, and occasions it to exfoliate, and horrible deformity is the result, which is illustrated by the engraving, recently drawn from a case Onder The Care Of Messrs. Brodie & Co. Surgeons.

In the former part of this volume, we have described the influence depraved habits have on the intellectual and moral faculties. We will now notice the ravages venereal excess has upon the flesh, glands, bones, veins, arteries, &c.

VENEREAL SORE THROAT

Begins with little or no pain: at first there is felt only a slight prickling, on swallowing food: when the throat is examined, ulceration is perceptible, and these ulcers have a particular appearance, they are of a conical shape, often of considerable depth, and generally attack that part of the throat called the almonds: on each side they are covered with a foul crust of thick white matter, resembling hog's lard: their effects, in the end, are, to produce hoareness, stinking breath, &c.

Besides the throat, every part of the mouth may occasionally be the seat of venereal ulcers, though they are most frequent on the palate of the tongue. A deep copper-coloured spot, somewhere between the pap and middle of the palate, is the first appearance: this spot at last becomes ulcerated, and advances rapidly, both in breadth and depth. The cure of the venereal sore throat is only to be accomplished by the proper and gradual administration of the Purifying Vegetable Pills, in doses of two at night and two in the morning, which must be continued for at least two months after the throat is quite well: but to assist their operation, check the progress of the ulceration, and prevent its destroying the soft palate, it is necessary to make applications to the throat, in the form of gargle; of which the following will be found one of the most successful:





Tincture of Cayenne Pepper, 30 drops

Muriatic Acid 15 drops

Infusion of Roses, 6 ounces.

The throat to be gargled three or four times a day, and be careful none passes down the throat.

In detailing the nature and effects of this disease, we will not make unnecessary comments; and at the same time, avoid as much as possible entering into loathsome descriptions.

In the the first stages of the venereal disease, the poisonous virus can be easily eradicated from the system by efficient remedies administered with skill, and by abstaining from those vicious indulgences which entail so much misery on the votary of pleasure; but if the malady is allowed to progress with all its horrors, or if the evils are aggravated by injudicious treatment, or by the rash and indiscriminate use of mercury by the unskilful, the effects are soon apparent; the eye loses its lustre, a pale languor is spread over the countenance, sometimes tinged with an hectic flush, as in consumptive cases; but beneath the illusive surface may be traced the impress of disease.





Inflammation ensues, pimples, carbuncles blisters, and pustules rise up in the face, forehead, chin, nose, throat, and palate; these sores suppurate, run one in the other very often, and cover the greater part or the whole of the countenance. The cartilage of the nose is often destroyed—the palate and tonsils frequently consumed. Then, again, the sight is often severely affected.

In the more desperate cases, copper-coloured eruptions spread all over the body, which degenerate into noxious foetid ulcers, causing the flesh to rot off the bones. The intestines are sometimes attacked with syphilitic sores, the very heart itself does not always escape from the insiduous poison. At other times, violent and racking pains are felt in the bones and limbs. Such are the dreadful effects of this loathsome disease, if allowed to spread its noxious influence uncontrolled through the system, or its virulence aggravated by the rash, indiscriminate, and undue administration of mercury.

There is not a bone, muscle, sinew, nerve, or bloodvessel in the human system that is not liable to its baneful influence; it consequently creates the most alarming disorders, if neglected or aggravated by injudicious treatment, predisposing the system to consumption of nervous kinds, rheumatism, scrofula, diseases of the nervous system, palsies, and incurable diseases of the stomach, liver, and bowels.

The poison of Syphilis is generally conveyed during sexual intercourse to the glans, prepuce or other part of the penis of the male, or in the labia, vagina, or uterus of the female. Sometimes in a few hours, but generally from four to seven days after impure connexion, a pimple or vesicle is perceived, of a very deep colour, surrounded by inflammation, on either of the above-mentioned parts, but seldom on the external surface, without excoriation has taken place. In a short time the pimple increases, breaks, and ulcerates, and will increase with great rapidity, if not immediately attended to. The inflammation is generally higher when the sore is on the prepuce or fraenum; and if great care is not observed, the destruction of the glans or a portion of the penis is likely to take place.





After a certain time, varying according to the virulence of the disease, if the chancre is not removed, the poison is conveyed by the absorbents branching from the penis to the glans in the groin, one or both become inflamed and enlarged, producing the swelling known by the name of bubo. If the bubo is not dispersed, it ipcreases in magnitude, and then suppurates. After suppuration has taken place, and the severity of the disease is not assuaged, the abscess will slough, destroying the adjacent parts; instances are known where even the femoral artery has been exposed, ulcerated, and the patient deprived of life by haemorrhage.

Washing the parts as soon as possible after connexion will often prevent infection. A weak solution of chloride of lime or soda is often applied as a preventative; but if a pimple or sore is once formed, the venereal virus is absorbed to that extent, that the disease cannot possibly be removed by ablution.

It is here necessary to state, as a caution, that a chancre may be conveyed to any part of the body where the skin is tender or broken, or to a mucous surface, such as the eye, the nostril, the lip, the nipple, by the application of the matter. A person should, therefore, be very particular, and not use a towel or napkin that may be soiled with the secretion from a malignant venereal ulcer, as the consequences may be very serious. Having detailed the symptoms of primary syphilis, chancre and bubo, we will now review the alarming symptoms the secondary stage assumes if allowed to proceed uninterrupted.





We are now arrived at that part of our history where the insidious enemy has his victim in entire subjection; where he has succeeded in insinuating himself in the system, disturbing, undermining and destroying all the vital functions. This stage of the disease is called Secondary Symptoms; they are generally announced at the onset by fever, pains in various parts of the body, headache, loss of appetite and restlessness at night; these sensations are sometimes experienced two months after the first appearance of the disease. In other cases, after the expiration of four months, and in numerous instances a much longer period elapses.

Secondary Symptoms comprise eruptions, ulcerations and disfigurations of the skin. Ulcerations of the mucous membranes of the mouth, throat and nose, pains in the joints, swellings of the bones and their coverings, and inflammation of the fibrous textures of the body.

We have now described, in as concise and clear a manner as possible, avoiding all technical terms, the direful state the system may be in, when under the dominion of Syphilis; even in this stage of the disease, many consider everything within the reach of the healing art is accomplished by gorging the patient with mercury, arsenic, and other mineral poisons, thereby finishing the ravages already commenced by that scourge of licentiousness and sensuality.





It is with indescribable gratification we can assure the desponding patient there is no occasion to despair. There are a host of resources within the reach of the skilful practitioner to overcome this powerful antagonist, without the necessity of recklessly resorting to such dangerous alternatives.

In the most desperate cases, our mode of treatment is, to impress on the mind of the patient the necessity of rest, abstemiousness, diet according to circumstances, and the use of the Purifying Vegetable Pills, and Cordial Balm of Zeylanica being such remedies as will purify the polluted blood; and cure with safety. In fact the object we have in view is to watch narrowly the progress of the disease—improve the patient's health by these remedies, although powerful, in counteracting the baneful influence of the syphilitic poison, are not in the least prejudicial to the system —arousing and invigorating the dormant faculties, and leading the patient easily and imperceptibly as it were to a state of convalescence.

Amongst the numerous evils arising from mercury, may be mentioned nodes on the head, chest, and other parts of the body, causing the most excruciating pain. Rheumatism of the bones and joints also often arises from the same causes.





The general appearance of the eruption is that of hard scorbutic spots, about the size of spangles, of a livid, brown, or copper cast, not raised above the skin; their surface, soon after their appearance, becomes very rough, and falls off, in the form of white scales, leaving a slight pit.

The manner of the eruption occasionally varies; and instead of displaying this kind of character, we find the face and nose covered with real pimples, tetters, and sebaceous concretions, which in their progress, become very troublesome, and often suppurate; and they continue to display, to the great annoyance of the individual, this kind of indefinite action for a great length of time: even the larger spots occasionally continue to pit, till the pit loses its covering, and degenerates into an actual ulcer, which discharges a thin acrid matter mixed with blood; and at other periods throws out ragged warty excrescences, with itching, and even deepscaled ulceration. With these appearances the face has been known to be completely covered: (see engravings.) SYPHILIS.





The poison of syphilis, when applied to the skin, produces inflammation and ulceration, and ultimately forms a sore, commonly called chancre. Chancres most commonly appear on the penis in men, and on the labia in women. They may be observed, however, in other parts. Midwives, who have attended persons affected with syphilis, have also been found to have them on their hands and arms, more especially if there be any abrasion of the cuticle in those parts. Chancre makes its first appearance with a kind of pustule or pimple; its base being more or less inflamed, according to the place where it occurs. If in the glans, the inflamed base is generally small, the surrounding parts being of rather a compact structure; if on the contrary, the chancre first appears on the prepuce, the surrounding inflammation in generally great. The chancre, as long as it is in its incipient or papular form, is generally attended with itching; nor when it becomes an ulcer, is it attended with much pain. The uusal seat of chancre is the neighbourhood of the frcenum, as, from the nature of the part, the infecting matter can more easily accumulate and incubate there than in any other part.

With respect to the treatment of syphilis, we may just now observe that two reasons influence us in not dwelling on that subject in a treatise designed almost for popular perusal;—the first is, that any advice we could here give in a general way, would be altogether inadequate to anything like practical application in the hands of a non-professional reader; and the other is, that the dreadful ravages which this frightful disease may commit on the constitution of the unfortunate individual who may become infected with it are so frightful, as entirely to deter us from saying anything on the subject of cure, lest we may, by an unluckly accident, occasion any reader to place confidence in his own treatment, and so prevent him from having recourse to that which should be the sheet-anchor of his hopes— namely, experienced medical advice.





We have, in our own experience, seen too many cases, wherein loss of health, loss of comfort, and loss of every enjoyment that could render life worth living for, to countenance even indirectly, any thing like dependence on self for the treatment of a disease, which, under judicious management, may be dispelled in a week or two, but which, if injudiciously treated, may entail consequences which he will have to deplore for years of his life, should life be spared to him. With respect to the prevention of the syphilitic virus, we think, however, we incur neither risk nor responsibility as practitioners, in recommending as the best and most rational means of preventing infection, the immediate ablution of the genital parts with soap and water; some have even recommended a dilute solution of chloride of lime, or of soda. Were it not that a precautionary measure which we are aware might be abused and converted into an immoral use, by the encouragement it might hold out to unlawful connexion, we would advise the individual to cover the penis with a layer of some thick oil, or, if that were not convenient, with melted candle-grease; this will choak up the mouths of the absorbents, and thereby prevent the virus from entering the system. When, however, a pimple or sore has once formed, mere ablution will not remove the disease. If such should occur, some advise the application of lunar caustic; this, however, we fear, promotes the absorption of the virus: we would, in such a case, recommend the patient to wash the part well and to keep it clean, to keep the bowels gently relaxed, to observe the recumbent posture, and refrain from all stimulating meat and drink. But the disease now under consideration is one of so serious a nature, and one attended with so many and such terrific consequences, that we abstain from recommending any other rules of treatment, than those which are merely preventive; we therefore earnestly advise the patient to take the earliest opportunity of availing himself of our professional advice. He may thereby save himself a world of suffering—and suffering too, which, according to the laws of nature, may be entailed on his innocent offspring.





Venereal infection may be conveyed to the embryoinfant, which in such case is said to be hereditarily affected. These individuals, at their birth, or at a later period, exhibit symptoms which, in their progress, blossom with all the apparent character of syphilitic excitement: some are covered with dark-copper specks and spots about various parts of the organs of generation: some are excoriated, and have small angry-looking but not deep-seated ulcerations : others are troubled with ulcers about the mouth, lips, and nose: (see engraving.)

We have already stated how these most awful calamities may be transmitted from the parent to the offspring, and how paramount is the duty of every person, forming a matrimonial engagement, to have recourse to every means to purify the system from the least taint that may arise from indiscretion.





We will not dwell any longer upon this subject, but in finally concluding, we cannot too forcibly impress on the minds of patients the necessity of a steady perseverance in the use of the Cordial Balm of Zeylanica and Purifying Vegetable Pills, which may be had at a





No. 4, Great Charles-street, Birmingham, or of any respectable Patent Medicine Vender in the united kingdom.





In order that what we have advanced may be perfectly understood, we have extracted a few of the most prominent cases that have come under our notice: a perusal of them is earnestly recommended; for, on so doing, the reader will clearly perceive the observations contained in these pages are not theoretical, but founded on circumstances that have actually occurred in the course of our practice. In making the following report, we have to remark, that in discharging our professional duties, the utmost delicacy is observed, and the feelings of the patient most scrupulously studied.

T. S. aged 46, became infected four years ago with, syphilitic disease. It appeared from his own history of the case that after suspicious intercourse, a small angry pimple formed upon the inside of the foreskin which soon ulcerated, and in the ordinary course, buboes formed in each of the groins. Under the treatment of his confidential surgical adviser, he took mercury very freely, the chancre slowly healed, suppuration occurred in each of the swellings, and for a time after the cicatrization of each abscess, he was requested to continue the use of his mercurial remedies. While persisting in this plan, his business unfortunately subjected him to great vicissitudes of temperature, to wet and cold weather, and he now began to complain of aching pains in his limbs, and a stiffness and dryness in the throat. Supposing that his pains were merely rheumatic, he derived some trifling and temporary relief from the warm bath and the use of guaiacum, and an opiate on going to bed. The uneasiness of his throat became exchanged for pain, especially on swallowing, he also complained severely of pains down the course of his shins, and of headache of an agonizing character. He was in this state when we first saw him, and on looking into the back part of the throat, we found what he had scarcely suspected, that the whole of the soft palate was in a fearful and rapid state of ulceration, his breath was offensive, his look was haggard, and blotches of the most decidedly syphilitic character were beginning to appear on various parts of the body, with running sores in the neck, and distorted features. (See engravings. J





CLEANLINESS.

Throughout the whole treatment of every species of venereal complaints, a strict observance of cleanliness ought to be our first and constant object. Without this, we have not only to bear with the filthiness, naturally arising from such complaints; but it has been believed, that the absorbtion of matter which, on such occasions, must take place, greatly aggravates the very disease for the removal of which our other remedies are applied.

A MOST REMARKABLE CASE OF IMPOTENCY, CAUSED BY MASTURBATION.

The following abounds with incidents the most remarkable and interesting that ever occurred to the authors during their practice :—

It was on the of January, 1838, a note was delivered to us, stating that a gentleman felt very desirous of having an interview on the following evening, about half-past five. In accordance with the reply, which stated Mr. R. Brodie would be disengaged at that hour, the gentleman called.





He stated he was a large landholder; had been a widower about three years; after being married about two years and a half, Lis wife died, aged twenty-three. With downcast eyes, he acknowledged the marriage rite was never consummated, in consequence of incapacity on his part. Having seen, in one of the metropolitan journals, our advertisement, he was induced to have advice.

Mr. E. Brodie, with whom he had the interview, on further conversation found he was the representative of one of the most ancient families in the kingdom; that he inherited extensive estates from a long line of ancestry ; was a man of profound learning; but, with the deepest anguish, he declared the fruits of his academical labours would never compensate for the mischief incurred from a solitary vice taught him by a depraved companion, when he was about thirteen years of age.

No sooner had the delusion empire over every other desire, than he sought every opportunity to indulge in those pernicious and demoralising habits. Six years passed on in this way, during which time his mother— (for his father died during his infancy)—perceived an alteration in his appearance; from a robust youth, he became feeble and emaciated. No one but a parent can imagine the mental agony this worthy lady endured, on beholding her beloved boy under the withering influence of consumption—her first and only child—the heir to unbounded wealth—the only link left to extend the chain—to preserve the memory of an ancient race. Of course, no expense was spared in having the first advice in the kingdom. Medical art succeeded, to a certain degree; the boy's health slightly improved, so that he was enabled to pursue his studies; but he continued debilitated, aud unequal to the least exertion, and without any zest for those salutary recreations, so necessary to relax the juvenile mind. In this state he went to college, propped up, as it were, by art. The causes of the disease were not eradicated; the infirmity still continued, for the medical men had no idea from whence the malady sprang: thus was a promising youth, of bright intellect, and an excellent constitution, blighted apparently in the morning of his existence. As he advanced to years of maturity, he began to perceive the enormity of the crime, and experienced the dreadful results arising from those illusions from which no real pleasure can be elicited: a practice agitating the system, poisoning the source from whence the healthy spring of life flows, perverting the senses, and creating incalculable mischief. Notwithstanding, the demon continued to have sufficient influence to tempt him to repeat, at intervals, the solitary vice; thus frustrating all the efforts and skill of his medical advisers. He at length perceived to his sorrow how he had perverted the ordinances of nature, and exchanged a powerful and vigorous constitution for a puny, sickly, and debilitated frame. The fact is, this young gentleman was naturally, as has been before observed, strong





and healthy, otherwise he would have sunk under these repeated inroads. Shame held his tongue; no one was aware of his being addicted to those solitary habits. Perceiving the evil, he was resolved to fly from the temptation—he was now about twenty years of age. He intimated to his mother a wish to take a tour on the Continent; having met with her approval he left England, accompanied by a medical friend, who could not only watch the disease, but be his companion during his journeyings—cheering and amusing him on the way; for he was now miserable in mind, as well as indisposed in health. By acting up to his determination he experienced a trifling improvement whilst abroad, but still suffered pains in the back and loins, loss of appetite and indigestion, with many other bad symptoms, produced by Masturbation.

During his travelling on the Continent, he indulged himself frequently in sexual intercourse; at length he •was obliged to refrain from that gratification from inability; for sometimes, in the act of coition, he experienced erection without emission; but the erection accompanied with the most excruciating agony in the genitals, and across the loins and back—at other times he experienced an involuntary emission without erection, merely on approaching the object of his desire. After taking a tour up the Rhine, through Switzerland, he returned home by the way of France. After being in England a short time, he was introduced to a young lady of great beauty and accomplishments, the daughter of a merchant who had retired from commercial pursuits with a large fortune. Being ambitious of a connection with an ancient family, he was very anxious of forming a matrimonial alliance with our patient.





This young gentleman secretly wished, for too good .a reason, that this negociation should terminate, and not be carried into effect; but shame, pride, and vanity, caused him to keep within his breast the deficiencies he laboured under. The old gentleman presented to his daughter a handsome dowry; and made a will, bestowing the residue of his immense property on the first son she should have, being determined to aggrandise his name; but if she should fail in having issue, the bequest to go to a distant branch of his family: thus every preliminary being made, they were united: now follows—the dread—the mortification—the consternation—sure to ensue under such circumstances.

If the veil could be drawn aside that conceals the mysterious rites of Hymen, what a scene would be disclosed!—This young lady's father centered all his happiness in his daughter's having a son—she was allied to Impotency! The shock she received must have been acute in the extreme—the disappointment preyed deeply on her mind, and had a visible effect on her health; after a lingering illness of two years, she sank into a premature grave, at the early age of twentythree.

When first we saw this patient, he was dreadfully emaciated, labouring under great difficulty of respiration, pains across the back and loins, involuntary emissions of a thin watery liquid from the urethra, particularly at night. After confidentially stating his case, he implored us to endeavour to reanimate him; fortunately he was endowed with a strong mind, notwithstanding his frailties; he had resolution enough to forbear, for a considerable time, from those evil propensities that had been his bane. These circumstances gave us some hopes of being enabled, with the blessing of God, of restoring him to health. He was furnished with medicines, and the Cordial Balm of Zeylanica, and Purifying Vegetable Pills, directed to have a cold bath three times a week, and to have a light and nutritious diet; and we are happy to state, in the course of three months, the improvement in his health was astonishing. At the expiration of that time, he went, by our advice, to Aix la Chapelle, where he found the greatest benefit from the waters and change of climate. On his return, we had another interview with him., and strongly recommended him to get married. About nine months after he followed our advice.





One morning in March, 1840, we received the following letter, the perusal of which gave us the most heartfelt gratification.

"Bourdeaux, 12 March, 1840. "Dear Sir,

"It is with inexpressible delight I address you; indeed I should consider myself very ungrateful if I were silent on an occasion like the present, owing as I do to you every happiness. My dearest wife was yesterday morning, about four o'clock, delivered of a fine boy. You have been the means, through the .blessing of God, of preserving an ancient family from extinction. I shall call on you when I come to town, and will tender for your acceptance some memento of my regard and gratitude,





"I am, dear Sir,

"Yours very respectfully,

"H. L. W p."

"To R. Brodie, Esq., "4, Great Charles-street, Birmingham.

IMPOTENCY

May arise from a deficiency of vital heat, a weakness of the solids, profuse venery, ill cured claps, gleets o* long continuance, &c, &c, but the most frequent cause of impotency, at that period of existence when man should be in the zenith of his procreative power, is in a general weakness of the generative organs, induced by too early an indulgence in coition, the pernicious and demoralizing crime of masturbation, or the abuse of venereal pleasures. In these cases, erection will not take place, or but feebly, although the mind be highly excited by lascivious ideas. The erector muscles are paralysed from over-use, and the semen if any is secreted, (from the lax and withered state of the testes,) is clear, serous, without consistence, and consequently deficient of prolific virtue. The victim of this humiliating disorder becomes a low, melancholy, dispirited, dejected being ; there passes over his mind a change which induces him to avoid all rational intercourse with his species, the language of his actions practically is,

"Man deJights not me. nor woman, eitliai."





He bids a gloomy farewell to the cheerful society and haunts of men, the busy turmoil of trade, politics, the thousand anxieties of commercial ambition appear to his indolent imagination, as either too great for his hope or foreign to his desires. Imbued with a moody misanthropy, the natural result of his own vices, he vents his splenetic complaints against the world at large, or if he speak it is to declaim respecting the darker side of human feeling and character. Thus he becomes a secluded isolated being, his mind vegetating on his own prurient and diseased fancies. Once, perhaps, there was the budding promise of future usefulness and activity, now how fearfully changed, the dupe of a lust alike horrible in imagination as well as in act. The blossom of youth, perhaps the flower of manhood, the supremacy of mind, all gone, degraded, obliterated. Some continue the practice from feelings of despair. They have become conscious of its ruinous tendency, and very desirous in consequence to resist the unmanly habit, they have sought intercourse with women, but to their deep dismay have found their powers so strangely and unexpectedly weak, that only an imperfect erection could be commanded, burning with baffled desire, yet powerless. Or perhaps the seminal fluid, thin, poor, and scanty, escapes too rapidly, and so, ashamed, vexed, dispirited, they forego any future attempts lest they should be subjected to the humiliation of again failing in that act, the energetic performance of which is the conscious pride of all who stand erect in the dignity of man. Abashed, the poor guilty sufferer retreats from the quick gaze of his fellow mortals; he sees, or fancies he perceives suspicion in the eye of every one who looks steadfastly upon him. His haggard countenance, his pale unmeaning inexpressive face, his dull lack-lustre eye, his thin and tremulous form may well betray him, as most assuredly they do to the practised observer.





See then in this a striking fulfilment of the prophetic warning, "there is nothing done in secret that shall not be revealed," neither "hid" even from the recognition of mortals, that shall not ultimately be made, even to them, evident as the noon-day. Self-pollution entails upon its victims marks as legible to the eye that can understand them, as the scars of small-pox. How much more closely are these things preceptible to the eye of Him by whom all actions are weighed,—to Him who knoweth the secrets of all hearts; from whose scrutinizing eye nothing can possibly excape? Can we produce a more fearful illustration of the stupifying effects of Onanism than is evident in this, that the victim of this abuse fears not in the secrecy of midnight, when knowingly the gaze of God is upon him, to do that which if caught perpetrating even by a child, or more especially a woman, he would instantly redden with shame, and if possible escape to hide his head from observation for ever. Dreadful depravity! strange perversity! deliberately and secretly to poison the power of all manly and natural enjoyment—to deprive, by a worse than a suicidal madness, the powers of reason, the throne which is their right—to entail living misery on themselves in this world and no hope for escape from condemnation in the next.

Too great a dissipation of the animal spirits doubtlessly weakens the stomach, destroys the appetite; and as due nourishment no longer takes place, the motion of the heart and arteries become dull and languid, and the surface of the body becomes of a leaden paleness. If the animal spirits and the seminal liquor be not identical, as the ancients supposed, yet this latter fluid, like the blood, is undoubtedly alive and vested with a vitality more intense, if possible, than that of the blood itself. So that the loss of the semen produces the same results as the loss of blood, but in a greater degree. M. Hoffmann, a celebrated continental physician, and teacher of medicine, relates, that he has witnessed the most dreadful accidents resulting from an undue dissipation of the semen. "After frequent nocturnal pollutions," says he, "not only the powers are lost, the body falls away and the face turns pale, {see engraving) but, moreover, the memory fails, a cold sensation seizes all the limbs, the sight is clouded, and the voice becomes hoarse, all the body languishes by degrees, disturbing dreams prevent sleep administering any relief, and pains ensue of the keenest description.





As the nervous system suffers, the brain becomes the subject of disease and melancholy indifference ; disgust, misanthropy, pass through their various grades into Madness. The startling truth is not to be concealed, that self-pollution is frequently the sole cause of Insanity. If the happy married man indulge to excess in the legitimate gratifications of the matrimonial couch, affections of the head are frequently observed, giddiness, dizziness, an unaccountable uneasiness, want of sleep, or perhaps drowsiness. We know that several celebrated men have actually died in the act of coition from the excitement of determined effort and failing power.

And, it must be obvious, that the same causes which tend to break down the energies of the general system, to bring on disorder of the stomach, and impair constitutional energy, will unquestionably tend to madness, and this because of the excitability of the nervous system, and the absolutely essential preservation of its powers. We are accustomed to read and to hear of frequent instances of gloomy determined Suicide, and the laws of our country as well as the verdicts of a coroner's jury, generally place a merciful construction upon the act; but, we happen to know, from the fact that our attention has been strongly directed to the subject, that among the unknown and unrecognised causes of suicide, the sense ofimpotence as resulting from selfpollution, or the insanity arising from the direct prac" tice of such acts, the weakness of intellect and soul which such vice engenders may often, without fear of error, be ascribed as the sole and direct cause o suicide.





There is no perverse practice, no deliberate vice, which so certainly disturbs the natural circulation of the blood in the brain, as the baneful habit of self-pollution. In particular parts of the system the blood may be quickened, and this without materially affecting the entire system of vessels; if this be permitted to occur, the neighbouring parts to those affected are deficiently supplied, and as the result, their functions become perverted, or for awhile suspended. When the genital organs are in a state of undue excitement or disease, the circulation of the blood in the brain is disturbed, and hence arise most important divertions from healthful action. Phrenologists inform us that the perceptive and refleetive faculties resident in the upper and anterior part of the head, become debilitated and deranged, hence all the diseased sensations that torment the votary of Sensualism. The human body is capable of enduring a certain amount of fatigue, and if it be divided into daily portions, the surfeit of one dissipated midnightjis relieved by the unvaried sleep of the next; but it is possible to overtax our capabilities, and then nature fails under the effort, no reaction succeeds. Mark how large the number of organs and structures engaged, for instauce, in any single act of one of the senses or bodily movements; these are obedient to natural acquirements. Let us think for a moment how we overstretch our powers, when we are compelled to call upon imagination to invent a fancied enjoyment, that which instinct, properly directed, could furnish in an instant, without the slightest exertion.





For it deserves to be attentively borne in mind that, independently of the drain upon the blood by the frequent emissions of its most brilliant and important secretion, thereby occasioning great debility, there is another and collateral cause of weakness arising out of the too frequent and unnatural erections with which some persons are troubled. These have a tendency to generate a species of atony, a palsied and enfeebled state of the male organ rendering it absolutely useless when really necessary. Nay, this remark is not without its practical value, independently of bad practices. We ought to perceive that the male sexual organ has its moments of excitement requiring long periods of repose. The writer knew an instance of a youth, who, anticipating with eager delight a long wished for appointment, found himself at the time suddenly impotent and powerless, not so much from fear, anxiety, or transport, but doubtless from the absolute weariness and flaccidity of an organ which, from mental causes, had for many hours previously maintained a state of throbbing erection. How much more strongly must these remarks apply in the unnatural state of masturbators, who are liable to an imperfect and temporary erection, even from the utterance of a casual word. Such frequent excitement of the genitals brings in its train not local palsy alone, (generative debility of the worst kind,) but general weakness of the severest character.

Before concluding, we think it right to mention, that, in many instances, patients who have in early life indulged in the habit of self-pollution, are frequently, many years after they have abandoned the pernicious habit, annoyed and rendered wretched by the consequences which it has left behind it. Such persons are troubled with involuntary discharges, pains in the back and limbs, and several other anomalous symptoms, which the experienced practitioner will at once refer to their true origin. To such persons we would earnestly recommend an immediate recourse to the Cordial Balm Of Zeylanica. The success which is to be derived from its use, is of such a nature as to insure to the patient a restoration of strength and vigour.





It would no doubt be acceptable to the reader, to see accounts of some of the remarkable cases and cures which have been performed by this truly valuable medicine, in disorders for which it was invented ; we have therefore selected a few of such cases as have come within our own immediate knowledge, and have inserted them, as well to enable all persons to judge of the superior efficacy of the Cordial Balm of Zeylanica and Purifying Vegetable Pills, as to shew that none however dangerous their situation may be, should despair, but seek for advice and remedies, even though bereft of every hope of relief.

TO MESSES. BBODIK.

Sirs,

When an indivdual has experienced any particular

mark of kindness, in which his welfare and happiness

have been considerably promoted, nothing is more natural than to seek out the person by whom we have been served, for the purpose of expressing our grateful sense of the favour bestowed; but, in case of health, where we have been recovered from the last deplorable stage of debilitated nature, and restored to the full enjoyment of all the various blessings of life, we are forcibly called on by every consideration, to acknowledge it in the most public manner; we owe this equally to our own feelings, which must be sensibly awakened on the occasion, to your skill and talents, which merit every encomium, to the public at large, in order that those who may stand in need of similar benefits may know where to receive them. ■





Having made these general observations, I shall proceed to state the particular case that has occasioned them, and to lay before the public the salutary effects that I have experienced under the greatest affliction that can possibly befall us.

I was born and educated at Northampton, and at sixteen years of age, went to the University of Oxford. Prior to my leaving Northampton, and more particularly at College, I was reduced to the most grievious s1;ate, by those horrid and unnatural practices too incident to youth, and which are not more baneful to our health than sinful in the sight of God.

I was at first afflicted with a dimness of sight, and a weakness in my loins, and a depression of spirits; in this situation I applied to Mr. Ware, a famous occulist, who informed me that it proceeded from the optic nerves. I for some time followed his advice, till one day, returning from shooting, I was seized with a numbness in my limbs to such a degree as to lead me to conclude that I should entirely lose the use of them; this induced me to put myself under the care of Dr. Letsom of London, but neither his aid nor the waters of Bath, which place I visited, afforded me the least relief; my spirits at length were so seriously depressed, with violent palpitation of the heart,, and my flesh so much decayed, that I became a mere skeleton. Observing however in the newspaper an advertisement respecting Messrs. Brodie's Cordial Balm of Zeylanica, I was induced to try the same, when I fortunately discovered in a pamphlet which it was wrapped in, the complaint I had so long laboured under.





I have the happiness to add, that by following the advice contained therein, and going through a complete course of Messrs. Brodie's invaluable Balm of Zeylanica, I am now, thank Heaven, perfectly recovered, and as well as ever I was in my life.

I am, Sir, your most obedient servant,

I. W.



A young gentleman of the age of sixteen had contracted a certain habit, which he continued until he was twenty-five. At this period he experienced extreme weakness of the optic nerves, and a very great dimness of sight; his memory was much impaired; he had also violent head aches, and sometimes excruciating pains in his forehead and temples. On endeavouring to read he frequently found himself seized with a species of giddiness, similar to that resulting from a state of inebriation, the pupils of the eyes were extremely dilated, and often pained him most acutely; the eyelids were extremely inflamed, and on rising in the morning he was unable to open them without the application of some warm fluid. He often shed tears involuntary, and a quantity of corrosive pus continually issued from the corners of his eyes. But certainly one of the worst and most debilitating symptoms was an infirmity to which he was subject, almost every night in his sleep, which had reduced him to a most deplorable state of debility and emaciation.





In this shocking condition was the unfortunate patient when he applied to us, and his mind in a state bordering on despondency. It was not without great difficulty that we could persuade him to the possibility of obtaining even an amelioration of his miserable case: and words are inadequate to describe his emotion, or his rapturous expressions of joy and gratitude on experiencing the primary indications of recovery.

This was an extremely obstinate and protracted case, but in the course of a few months he was restored to himself, if we may use the expression, and to society, of which he is now a respectable and useful member.



Dear Sirs,—I have taken your Cordial Balm of Zeylanica with as much regularity as possible: and it is with pleasure I have to say, that I can perceive great improvement, and which I allow myself to hope, may be the precedent of perfect recovery. The state of the bowels has never been inconvenient.





Hoping to have your future directions as soon as convenient, I remain, gentlemen, your very obedient servant, J. M.

Liverpool, August 9th, 1839.



To MESSRS. BEODIE & Co-, Surgeons.

Dear Sirs, Beading, May I, 1837.

As a convincing proof of the efficacy of your medicine I shall beg you to insert the following case, which has happened within my knowledge. A young man, a native of this place, was violently afflicted with a weakness, occasioned by youthful impropriety, and was reduced to the last stage of consumption, notwithstanding all the medical aid of this place, but on taking your Balm of Zeylanica, he is perfectly restored, to the no small joy of his parents. I trust you will advertise this for the good of the world, and,

I am, dear Sirs,

Your humble servant,

GEORGE SUMMER.



Gentlemen,—I am from the use of a bottle of Zeylanica, which I bought of you, restored from great weakness, debility, pains in the back and head, to perfect health; I had long been a sufferer! It was occasioned by a nervous complaint, originating by having made too free with my constitution. Had it not been for your excellent medicine, I might still have laboured under that distressing and afflicting complaint. Pray send me another bottle per coach, and oblige yours truly. JAMES TOMKINS,





Albion-street, Leeds.



L. D. was by profession a watch-maker; he had lived prudently and enjoyed a good state of health till he was about seventeen years of age. At this period he gave himself up to self-pollution, which he repeated every day, sometimes even to the third time, and the avacuation was always preceded by a slight insensibility and a convulsive motion in the extending muscles of the head, which drew it very much back, whilst the neck was extremely swelled. A year had not yet elapsed before he began to feel a great weakness after every act. This notification was not sufficient to restrain him from his filthy practices—his soul already devoted to these odours was incapable of forming any other, and the repetition of his crime became every day more frequent, till such time as he was in a state to apprehend his death. Too late grown wise, the evil had already made so great a progress that he was incurable, and the genital parts were become so easily irritated and were so weak, that it was no longer necessary that this unhappy youth should be an agent in order to shed his own seed: the slightest irritation immediately procured an imperfect erection, which was followed by an evacuation of this liquor, which daily increased his weakness. The spasm, of which he was not before sensible but in consummating the act, and which ceased therewith, was now become habitual, and frequently attacked him without any apparent cause, in so violent a manner, that during the whole period of the fit, which sometimes lasted fifteen hours and never less than eight, he felt such violent pain in the hinder part of the neck, he did not scream out, but absolutely howled, and all this while it was impossible for him to swallow either solids or fluids. His voice was become hoarse, he entirely Jost his strength and was obliged to give up his profession altogether incapacitated. Thus overwhelmed in misery, he languished almost without any assistance for some months, and was the more to be pitied, for what memory he had remaining, and which he was at length entirely bereft of, only served him to take an incessant retrospect of the cause of his misfortunes, which were increased by the aggravating horrors of remorse. He less resembled a living creature than a corpse; lying upon straw, meagre, pale, and filthy, casting' forth an infectious stench, almost incapable of motion, a watery palish blood issued from the nose, his tongue was frightfully swelled, and saliva constantly flowed from his mouth. Having a diarrhoea, he voided his excrement in the bed without knowing it; he had continued flux of semen ; his sore watery eyes were deadened to that degree that he could not move them, his pulse was very small, quick, and frequent. It was with great difficulty he breathed, reduced "almost to a skeleton in every part except his feet, which became dropsical; the disorder of his mind was equal to that of his body, devoid of ideas and memory, incapable of connecting two sentences, without being afflicted at his fate, without any sensation than pain which returned with every fit, at least every third day:—far below the brute creation, he was a





spectacle, the horrible sight of which cannot be conceived, and it was difficult to discover that he had formerly made part of the human species. He died at the end of a few weeks, his whole body having become dropsical.



"I have," says my illustrious friend, M. Zimmerman, "seen a man twenty-three years of age, who became epileptic after having weakened himself by frequent self-pollutions. As often as he had nocturnal pollutions, he fell into a complete fit of epilepsy. The same thing happened to him after any commission of that act, from which however he would not a bstan, notwithstanding these consequences, and all the admonitions against it. Having however abstained from it for some time, I cured him of the nocturnal pollutions, and had even hopes of curing his epilepsy, of which the fits were already gone off. He had recovered his strength, his stomach, his sleep, and a very good colour, after having looked like a corpse; but having returned to his acts of self-pollution, which were always followed by an attack of the epilepsy, he came at length to be taken with fits in the street, and he was found one morning dead in his chamber, —fallen out of bed and bathed in his own blood."



The following case illustrates most forcibly the injurious effects arising from self-abuse.

Mr. L. S., iron-master, of Wolverhampton, aged thirty years, applied for our advice a few months since.





He complained' of excessive debility, pains in the knees, and a peculiar grating sensation of the hipbone when walking, a tottering gait, sometimes so prominent that a person would have supposed him intoxicated. His memory was also much impaired and the mental faculties weakened; the power of hearing was also considerably diminished. After conversing with him some time, Mr. S. acknowledged he accustomed himself from an early age to self-pollution. Being convinced his indisposition arose from those pernicious practices, we implored him to refrain from them, for without doing so medicines would be of no avail. On his promising faithfully to follow our advice, we gave him medicines expressly to meet his case. About a month after the first interview he called on us, previous to his departure from Birmingham, and was in every respect very much improved. We gave him a fresh supply of medicines, directing him to write as soon as they were taken. At the expiration of another month we received the following letter :—



"Wolverhampton, 18th March, 1842. "gentlemen,

"Having finished the medicine, I beg leave to address you, in compliance with your wish. I have certainly experienced much benefit from your mode of treatment, and am happy to state I can walk seven or eight miles a day with very little fatigue, and am also capable of attending to my business, which I found myself quite unequal to, before consulting you; but i





after eating a hearty meal, for my appetite is much improved, I feel a sensation of fulness and slight nausea. You will have the goodness to forward me another packet of the Cordial Balm of Zeylanica, if you think I require it.

"I am, Gentlemen,

"Yours very respectfully,

L. S ."

"To Messrs. Brodie & Co., Surgeons, 4, Great Charles-street, Birmingham.



We will add another case, shewing the evil conseqences resulting from Masturbation.

"Cambridge, 17th Feb., 1841, "Gentlemen

"Will you have the goodness to pay immediate attention to the following statement, for I am truly miserable. The writer of this is twenty-two years of age, thin and emaciated; and, in the opinion of every one, approaching very quickly to my latter end. My friends think me consumptive,—the professional men are of the same opinion. I feel the greatest lassitude on the least exertion, have great difficulty of breathing, and on walking gently up stairs feel violent palpitations of the heart, and respiration sluggish. I have also a hard, husky cough, particularly at night; my voice, which was once as clear as a bell, has a peculiar shrillness; my sight is likewise very much affected, a lighted candle has the appearance to me of a halo round it of many colours. I feel an unpleasant sensa





tion of numbness down the spine. The physician under whose care I am, has no idea of the nature of my illness. There are other circumstances attending my case, which I have been ashamed to communicate to him as well as to others of the profession, who have been consulted.

"I will now tell you the cause of my writing to you. Yesterday I went into the room of a fellow-student, where I found your work On Virility. On my friend's servant telling me he was out, but expected every moment, I sat down, and was soon deeply absorbed in reading the contents of the volume. My attention was rivetted, amazement possessed me to the utmost, on reading a description corresponding exactly to my complaint; never till then was I aware of the enormity of the crime I have committed; and anguish at the idea has seized me; the sufferings, mental as well as bodily, that I have endured this night, are beyond my power to describe, therefore I implore you attentively to peruse my letter, and give me your candid opinion by return of post, for I shall be on the rack till I hear from you.

"There are other symptoms arising from my complaint that the Doctors are not at all aware of. I am troubled with involuntary emissions from the urethra, particularly at night, when I am under the influence of lascivious and horrid dreams, unaccompanied with erection of the penis. It is now two or three months since there were any erections, but they caused a poignant pain in the testicles, almost beyond endurance. I cannot enjoy the society of the fair sex for I am agitated and experience the most unpleasant sensations in their company. If a young lady evinces the least courtesy, I am flurried and nervous in the extreme; severe tremors thrill through my frame, and involuntary emissions follow. I am obliged abruptly to leave the room and conceal my weakness in solitude. There is no occasion my avowing the cause of the deplorable state I am in, for you can no doubt judge it rightly. Excuse the rambling manner with which I have described my case, for I am far from collected in my ideas. There is enclosed your usual fee. As I shall be within half a mile of Royston, have the goodness to direct your reply at the post-office in that town. Your immediate attention would greatly oblige, "Gentlemen, "Your very obedient servant,





"S. V N."

Immediately on receiving our reply, the writer of the above came to Birmingham, and called on us. The result of the consultation was, his immediately placing himself under our care, on solemnly promising to refrain from those practices which proved so detrimental to him. He strictly adhered to our instructions; and in the course of three months, we had the pleasure of receiving the following letter :—

« Gainsboro', 28th May, 1841. "Dear Sirs,

"It is with the utmost pleasure I have to acr quaint you of the great improvement in my health, and the surprising alterations in my mental faculties. I feel as you assured me I should by attending to your





directions, invigorated, and quite another being; and

depend on it, I will never lose sight of your excellent

advice.

"The Earl of is going on the Continent, and

wishes me to accompany him; he intends to reside at

Rome for two or three months. Do you think the air

will agree with me? for I understand it is far from

healthy. If you consider it would be prej udicial, I will

not stop there.

"I feel so well in every respect, I do not think I

shall require any more medicine. I shall, however,

call on you previous to leaving England.

"t remain, dear Sirs,

"With every feeling of regard and esteem,

"Your's very truly,

"S. V v."



The following letter is annexed, as it illustrates most forcibly the mischief that ensues from neglect. A person may be infected with a clap, and, from false delicacy, feels averse to consult a medical man, or presumptuously thinks himself capable of conducting his own case—apparently a mere clap and excoriation; he goes on, taking medicines, aggravating and increasing, instead of subduing, the inflammation, till at length the case assumes a more decided and alarming aspect. However, we cannot do better than let the patient speak for himself, through the medium of his letter, which is as follows :—





"Chepstow, Monmouthshire, April, 1842'.

"Dear Sms,

"It is now nine weeks since I last had the pleasure of seeing you, and my gratitude dictates me to return my most fervent thanks for what you have done for me. You will know me by the initials of W. S.; but I indeed should be unworthy the name of man, were I longer to withold my true name and address, but I must beg of you to refrain from using it; but this I will leave to your discretion.

"You cannot forget the awful state I was in from an imprudent connection, when I first saw you, and how I had been treated, partly through a desire to keep the affair a secret even from a medical man.

"The swelling in the groin subsided, as you stated, and the foreskin of the penis went back, as if by enchantment; and, as you conjectured, the glands were covered round with small ulcers, which I immediately treated as you desired, and am happy to state, they have all disappeared, and the discharge has stopped. I have been very attentive to the rules you laid down; but they were so easily followed, I had no occasion to stop even within doors, and am sure no one suspected my having taken medicine. I was enabled, as you stated, to follow my usual occupation, and have frequently ridden to Newport during its worst stages. You said it would be necessary for me to have another small supply of medicines, for which I have enclosed a remittance, and you will please forward what you may think necessary to the White Lion coachoffice, Bristol, addressed as the last. When I come to Birmingham which will be in the course of two months I will call, and give you my personal and more substantial acknowledgements for what you have done for "Your most humble and obedient servant,





«W. S .

"I trust you will oblige me by inserting this case in your Work on Virility, but I will leave it to your discretion to omit or insert my name."



If any thing further was required to convince the most incredulous, the statement that now follows is unanswerable, pourtraying as it does the pernicious influence of self-pollution on the mind, as well as body :.—

"Dear Sir,

"I was one amongst that unhappy number guilty of the most abominable sin, self-pollution, to the detriment both of my body and soul. It is now above two years and a half since first my steps were providentially directed to you. Never, my dear Sir, shall I forget the kind manner in which you spoke to me; and how repeatedly I had made up my mind to call before I summoned sufficient resolution; but let that pass—the bare thoughts of what I was makes me shudder. Never did I think, even by your aid, I should be a different man to what I was; a dispirited, miserable being, an almost inanimated mass, all my senses deserting me, and my natural good feelings which I once did possess gone. I was like an outcast on the face of the earth—an useless load, without sufficient energy to do the common offices of life. Never did I imagine I should be paying honourable attentions to a young and beautiful lady. At one time the idea would have been repulsive to me, as everything was that was good.





"Through Divine Providence, and your unequalled skill, I am restored to every happiness. All my attempts to express my thankfulness prove abortive; I cannot say what I would; but enough of this.

"You will be happy to hear, my dear Sir, that the emissions are entirely stopped, and I have not had the slightest return these six months, and am as strong as any young man of my age, having just turned twenty five. I am capable of the greatest possible exertion, both of mind and body, and am constantly rallied by my friends on the sudden change in my appearance for the better—that is only external; if they knew the internal benefit I have received, the brink of destruction I was on, and from whence you snatched me, they would indeed be surprised. Would to God it was a case where my name could be mentioned ; but I see no objection to your publishing this on witholding my real name.

"If you will allow me, I will write again, in the course of a few months, as then I shall have entered into the matrimonial state.

"With every sentiment of gratitude,

"I am, dear Sir, "Yours very respectfully, "J. F.

"R. J. Brodie, Esq., Surgeon, "4, Great Charles-street, Birmingham."





As the above complaints seldom come within the observation of gentlemen in the general line of practice, it is no reflection upon their knowledge or judgment to say that very few of them have an opportunity of that experience which is the only solid foundation of medical fame, whilst Messrs. Brodie's extensive pratice in all the above cases, enables them to afford that permanent relief to such unfortunate patients, as, perhaps, they cannot experience under any other practitioners in the kingdom. And it is with the greatest pleasure and satisfaction that they acknowledge the candour and liberality of those gentlemen of the faculty who have countenanced their claim to public approbation.



The following is a case of Gonorrhoea, in which Copaiba and Cubebs were exhibited unsuccessfully, nauseating the stomach to that degree, that their very smell produced sickness. There were no inflammatory symptoms when the patient placed himself under our care. The subjoined is a copy of a letter received from Weymouth, where he resides.

"Weymouth, 2nd March, 1842. "Dear Sirs,

"Agreeable to your desire, I have to inform you that the packet of medicine you sent me is nearly exhausted—happy at the same time to state, that the improvement I have already made is beyond my most sanguine expectations. The discharge from the penis continues, but as you anticipated, gets thicker, but unattended with pain. I cannot help here remarking what sufferings result from indiscretion.—I am a point in fact. Having laboured under a violent and painful discharge for five months, applying as I did immediately I experienced the first indication of disease to a country practitioner, who certainly by the aid of Copaiba and Cubebs I think kept the discharge back, until I was so nauseated with the remedies, which indeed were as bad to me as the disease, but perhaps not so fatal in their consequences. You remember the haggard and worn appearance I made when first I consulted you. I am now, thank God, quite plump, and looking as well as ever.





"What surprises me most is your remedies being so pleasant and easily taken; yet so efficacious. I must have another supply, which I have no doubt will be sufficient for my perfect restoration.

"You will please forward what is necessary by the same conveyance as the last; and with many thanks for what you have already done,

"I am, Gentlemen,

"Your most obedient humble Servant,





We had the satisfaction of having a visit from the above gentleman a fortnight after sending the medicine, and the gratification of finding him perfectly restored to health.

We are continually receiving communications from all parts of the country, testifying the success attending our efforts in subduing the disease treated on in these pages; the following is selected from the number.





A gentleman, aged twenty-seven, whose professional pursuits as a minister of a large dissenting congregation, in the North of Yorkshire, rendered his absence from home (excepting at one period of the year,) undesirable, wrote to me in the autumn of 1835, respecting a.yleety discharge from the urethra, for which he had unsuccessfully employed a variety of remedies. His confidential surgical attendant had repeatedly introduced the bougie armed with caustic, under the impression that the diseased secretion resulted from stricture in the membraneous portion of the urinary caual. The immediate and invariable result of the use of this instrument was considerable pain in making water: it was ejected with straining, but not so far as usual, and divisable into forked streams. Under these circumstances, the discharge persisting, he communicated with us; and it being impossible to ascertain the actual condition of the urethra, and the existence or absence of stricture without a personal interview; he left home by one of the night coaches, and presented himself at our house the following day. We found the testicles much disposed to enlargement, and decidedly tender to the touch; and as he had been accustomed to much self-indulgence at the table, the system being irritable, we declined exploring the urethra until a few days' quiet rest, together with the loss of blood from his arm, had subdued the morbid irritability of the parts. Having acted freely on the bowels, we passed a moderate sized bougie, which on reaching the more sensitive portion of the canal, produced faintness. We repeated the introduction of the same instrument after three days with better success, the suffering being less violent. He wa3 advised to take an opiate at bed time, and to use an enema of castor oil the following morning. After a few priliminary attempts at intervals of twice a week, we succeeded at length in reaching the supposed seat of stricture, the instrument being firmly resisted. This plan of attack was persisted in on alternate days, varying the time of the retention of the bougie, as the patient was better enabled from habit to bear it: after a fortnight's perseverance, we had the gratification to find the same instrument suddenly pass the stricture, and fairly enter the bladder. Steady gentle, and oft repeated pressure, had accomplished what could not be affected by violence and severity, which indeed, only serve to aggravate all the secondary consequences of the constriction, and materially augment the irritable inflammation producing the discharge. In six weeks longer, by the introduction of the bougie twice a week, our patient recovered completely and returned home ; the discharge having completely ceased, and the urine passing without effort in a full stream from the bladder.





A Commercial Traveller, whose habits of life had been tolerably free, summoned me hastily in the night to his Inn, under the following circumstances :—He stated that he had been affected with gonorrhoea about six weeks, haying contracted the infection while in a state of inebriety. It appears that in a few days after the commencement of the disease, the penis became very red, swollen, and painful: a smart fever set in, and presently a dark spot made its appearance on the body 'of that organ, and gradually extended round it. He had been bled at his own request, and had taken extreme and frequent doses of some advertised specific in the form of pills, until salivation induced him to desist. Meanwhile, the lividity assumed the distinct character of a large slough, which seperating exposed an irregular and most irritable sore. It was evident that the work of destruction was not yet complete; and that aggravated by the unnecessary and injurious use of the above evidently mercurial remedies, all effort to save further portions of the penis would be comparatively hopeless, however, the effort was made. The sloughing process laid open a fistulous entrance into the urethra, from which, instead of the natural outlet, the urine was suffered to escape; and it really appeared probable at one period, that the whole anterior extremity of the penis would be cast off by the rapid gangrenous action. We ordered the surface of the sore to be bathed with a warm strong stimulant application, and advised appropriate internal remedies. Carefully watching the case, we had the satisfaction to witness the destructive extension of the slough arrested, the dead parts on seperating, exposed a more healthy surface than might be expected, and the newly exposed wound was dressed with the same application as the originally gangrenous ulcer. Three weeks from the date of our first visit, the slough had entirely seperated at Ihe upper portion of the penis, leaving the extremity of the glans bare, but uninjured; the integuments to some extent behind it seperated, leaving a ragged, extensive, ulcerated surface. The pulse was then quick, the skin hot, the tongue furred, and the marks of constitutional irritation tolerably severe. Calomel, in alternative doses, conjoined with opiates were administered at bed time; every second morning, small doses of castor oil were given, and during the day, the acetate of ammonia, with tincture of henbane, varied afterwards for the carbonate of ammonia in effervescence. The patient now obtained rest at night, the aspect of the wound became less angry; the lotion of nitric acid with opium, was substituted for the vegetable stimulant, and the gonorrboeal discharge from the urethra, which had been partially suspended, again escaped freely. After another week, the wound began to granuate, yet without the disposition to contraction; but as it became more clean, and less painful, pure nitric acid was applied to the edges; the decoction of sarsaparilla, with immediate doses of the sulphate of quinine, and a free allowance of animal food and bottled porter were also advised; and under this treatment, the patient's progress towards convalescense was most satisfactory. From this period the healing process went on uninteruptedly; the gonorrhceal inflammation of the urethra subsided, and after the cicatrization of the ulcer, the fistulous edges of the opening midway into the uretha, were easily closed by exciting the adhesive inflammation, and in less than sixteen weeks from the date of our first visit, we had the satisfaction of meeting our patient (still somewhat weak and pale,) in a gig on the way to Burnley, in pursuit of his commercial avocations.





York, September , 1842.

Sir,—In compliance with your wish, I write to inform you that all the symptoms of discharge, as well as every feeling of debility in the generative organs, are now completely gone. I feel myself perfectly adequate to discharge the duties of a husband—my appetite is now quite restored—I sleep soundly at night— the discharge never appears for a moment, unless when at stool, and that only when my bowels are constipated. Shall I go on some time longer with my medicine? I am, Sir, gratefully yours, very obedient, X. Y.

This patient continued to take medicine for three or four weeks more, and is now perfectly restored to health—he has lately become a father.



J. L. aged 29, of a strong make, originally had been a stout athletic man, but from long illness, is now become very much debilitated. In the year 1834, he contracted a syphilitic taint. The first symptom was a chancre, and then a bubo appeared in the groin. He put himself under medical treatment, and took a great quantity of mercury. During the time he was under the mercurial influence he was exposed to wet and cold; and then became affected with pains in the limbs. From them, however, he obtained relief by the use of warm baths and other appropriate means, and continued in the enjoyment of what may be called merely tolerable health for about a year. About this time he began to feel some uneasiness in his throat, and considerable pain in swallowing either solids or liquids; he also complained of acute pains in the shins, all along the sharp edge of the tibia, and of constant and annoying head-aches. At this juncture of affairs we saw him for the first time. On examining the throat we found at the back part of the fauces an extensive ulcer, the appearance of which plaintly bespoke its syphilitic origin—it was very rugged, and uneven— it seemed as if it had been " dug out with a spade," the scalp, when even but slightly touched, was extremely painful; as were also the shin bones; there was total loss of rest at night, high fever, and great exhaustion, all relish for food of any kind being totally extinct; there were nodes also along the tibia. Here was a bad case of secondary syphilis—the patient, though originally of a good constitution, was now broke down from long and intense suffering. He now also began to complain of a teazing cough, which gave us not very serious alarm, as, on examining the chest, we found no signs of pulmonary disease. The cough we knew was occasioned by the extension of the syphilitic ulceration to the larynx and its cartilages. There were also symptoms of hectic fever beginning to manifest themselves; this too was explicated on the supposition that the larynx was involved; the pain felt on pressing the larynx, and the alteration in the patient's voice, were further confirmatory of this opinion. We undertook the case, unfavourable as it certainly was, and after about eight weeks' assiduous attention, we brought the patient round, by a course of the Cordial Balm of Zeylanica and the Purifying Vegetable Pills: he is at this moment as hale and strong a man as ever.





"Halifax, 28th, 1841. "Gentlemen,

"It is with the deepest sense of gratitude I have to acquaint you that I am considerably better than when I had the pleasure of seeing you; the advice you gave me, has sunk deep into my soul never to be obliterated: you, indeed, tore the veil from the monster I was creating within myself; neither shall I forget the confidential manner with which you spoke of my recovery. Where on earth did I expect to find such a friend to influence my mind, as you have, to shun such pernicious and abominable practices? How many times did I promise, and, above all, vowed to my Creator, that each should be the last time I would indulge in that awful crime—Masturbation j but without the resolution of desisting from those habits.

"My dear Sir, through the medium of your more than kind advice, and the virtues of your Balm of Zeylanica, which I have already taken, I have, thank God, sufficient command over those unnatural and beastly propensities, to be enabled to cast them aside, and seek pursuits more worthy a man; and, as you observe in your invaluable work on Virility, the noblest work of the Creator.

"Your book, indeed, ought to be the companion of every youth, for, if it had not been for the accidental perusal of it, I should have been now perhaps worse than I was when you first saw me. You may depend on my following your injunctions, and taking my medicines regularly. I will write again shortly, stating how I am getting on. With sincere wishes for your welfare and happiness,





"Believe me to remain,

"Your obedient and grateful servant,



"W. G."



The case we are about transcribing, most forcibly shows the necessity of ascertaining from the patient afflicted with Gonorrhoea whether it is accompanied with Chordee, which is generally the case; for if not subdued, the most serious consequences may arise, from the irritability it causes to the whole system.

An engineer, in the employ of the Great Western Eailway Company, called upon us respecting a Chordee, which caused him the most excruciating agony and inconvenience, so much so, that he declared he should be obliged to leave his situation, if he could not obtain relief. About a fortnight before we saw him, he contracted, from an impure connection, Gonorrhoea in its severest form. He suffered extreme scalding on voiding urine, and the discharge from the urethra was very profuse. These symptoms were mitigated in some degree by the remedies he had taken; but he declared the greatest dread seized him when the hour of rest approached, for no sooner did he get warm in bed, than the erection of the penis ensued, causing the most intense agony, and followed by a copious emission of semen, and a continual inclination to make water, without the ability of doing so. Every night was passed in walking up and down the room, and bathing the parts in cold water, until he was shivering with the cold, and as soon as he retired to his bed, the Chordee returned with redoubled violence. From these symptoms it was very evident he had been taking medicines of a stimulating nature. Our mode of treatment was very opposite: he now began to take our Vegetable Pills, which composed the agitation the system was thrown into, subduing the inflammation, entirely removing every unpleasant symptom. Thus the man was enabled to attend to his usual occupations, and in the course of three weeks was restored to perfect health.





In the course of our practice, many cases have been submitted to us of pains in the limbs, commonly denominated rheumatism, which we have often found to be the result of a Venereal Taint, from which the system has not been effectually purified. These cases assume many forms and prove tedious and difficult to cure, if the medical man is not aware of the origin of the complaint. Sometimes it attacks the back and loins, at other times the feet—thus producing lameness— followed by a general debility of the whole system. Many such cases can be enumerated, but the following may suffice to show the multiform nature of the disease.

A gentleman, filling an official situation in the Bank of England, consulted us, merely to be satisfied in his own mind whether the complaint he laboured under proceeded from cold or any other cause; he felt, he said, violent rheumatic pains across his back, sometimes from the nape of the neck to the other extremity of the spine. When he called upon us, he complained of severe pains in the left knee and right ankle, which produced lameness, so that he could not walk across the room without difficulty. We found a slight eruption of a chocolate colour across the shoulders, which, with the other symptoms, caused us to suspect the deplorable state the gentleman was in arose from Venereal Infection, contracted at a former period; neither were we wrong in our surmises. The patient was about thirty-eight years of age, and confessed that he indulged in promiscuous sexual intercourse, about twelve or thirteen years before applying to us: when he married, and consequently led a more regular life : he had frequent attacks of Gonorrhoea; the very last time he had that unpleasant visitor, he took the remedies that relieved him before: the discharge was soon stopped, but was followed by a swelling of the testicle, which obliged him ever since to wear a suspensory bandage; this attack proved very irksome for a long period. He declared to us, he never enjoyed perfect health from that time, and was always suffering the most excruciating pains in his limbs: we rightly attributed his sufferings to the Venereal virus not being completely eradicated from the system, and also to the undue administration of mercury: we treated him accordingly, administered the Cordial Balm of Zeylanica and the Purifying Vegetable Pills, with other appropriate remedies; and in the course of six months he was perfectly recovered.





J. B., aged 29, of full habit of body, had in early life addicted himself to the practice of self-pollution; but after indulging in it for some time he was induced





to relinquish it from the sad effects he found it to produce in the health of a friend of his. After having given up the habit, he experienced an involuntary seminal discharge, but this, after a time began to disappear, except either when the state of his bowels were neglected, or he indulged too much in the use of alcoholic drinks. He was naturally of a strong constitution, and his health suffered but little from the practice of masturbation above alluded to. When about the age of twenty he contracted gonorrhoea, for which he submitted to medical treatment; during the progress of this he had swelled testicles, the size of one gland was considerably larger than that of the other, even for years after the disease was removed. From this period up to the time of his consulting us (an interval of between eight and nine years), he was troubled with more or less of a sero-seminal discharge from the urethra, which improved or became worse, according, to his occasional deviation from regular regimen and habits of living ; the discbarge always and invariably became aggravated, after his having sexual intercourse; the enlarged size of one testicle which had continued since the gonorrhoea, as also the seminal discharge which still annoyed him, became to him a source of considerable uneasiness. He found also that on attempting to have intercourse with a female, his semen was discharged almost before ingress was effected. He now contemplated matrimony, an advantageous offer presenting itself in that way, but was deterred from entering into so responsible a state without consulting some one with respect to the state of his genital organs and their debilitated tone. He accordingly consulted a medical man, who, after prescribing some medicines for him, encouraged him to marry forthwith, assuring him that all was right; he did so, but on the first night of his marriage he had ample reason to regret his precipitancy; he was totally unable to perform the marriage duty. This state of debility, and indeed of absolute impotence, continued for some months, when he consulted us. We undertook the case, restricted him to a peculiar regimen; interdicted all sexual intercourse for some time; submitted him to a course of the Cordial Balm of Zeylanica and Purifying Vegetable Pills such as the nature of the case indicted, and hi about four weeks he was perfectly restored to the full possession of his powers as a husband.





Glasgow. Dear Sirs,—I do not find in your work on Virility any case similar to my own, I shall therefore, without reserve, state it, and if you are of opinion that the Cordial Balm of Zeylanica will cure me, I will commence a course willingly. I have had one or two gonorrhoeas, and since I had the last, about three years ago, I have been suffering somewhat under the state described as morbid irritability, and an inability to retain the fluid in the secreting organs. Before that time my powers were quite equal, I believe, to those of the generality of men. My age is fifty-four, and I am in excellent general health and spirits. Since the period above stated, I do not think the penis has ever had the capacity it formerly had. When in bed I constantly





have erections, but seldom if ever seminal emissions. On these occasions, the erections go down, without any emission; but when I address a female with an intent to cohabitation, the penis immediately becomes half erected, and fluid oozes out, without any sensation whatever. This, however, does not quench the desire. When I come to the point with a female, I feel all the desire I ever did, but the watery oozing out continues, and the penis does not expand to anything near the size it does when I am by myself in bed. When I commence the act of cohabitation, I frequently emit before, (and invariably the instant after) penetration. I presume it must be a weakness in the vessels containing the fluid. I have now waved all delicacy, and fully explained to you my case, and I hope you will excuse the freedom with which I have done so. I should say it came under the head of nervous debility, but that I am in excellent health and spirits. If gentlemen, you think, on this full statement, that you see my case clearly and can cure it, I shall be happy to place myself under your care as soon as possible. You will of course be pleased to consider this as strictly private.

I am, dear Sirs, yours truly D. L.



A gentleman consulted us about three years ago in a sad state of nervous agitation and alarm, from the impresssion, not altogether groundless, that he was rapidly becoming the subject of generative debility. There was no difficulty in ascertaining, that early injurious habits, in which, without knowledge or fear of





their consequences, he had indulged, were the unforseen cause of his weakness. He had formed a matrimonial engagement about five or six months previous to his first consultation, and much to his annoyance and mortification, every attempt to discharge the connubial obligation was foiled in consequence of the seminal fluid escaping involuntarily, and with only imperfect erection, every time he would fain have vigorously approached the partner of his desires. Sexual power appeared to be so far perverted as to be almost if not altogether gone. He informed us that he had waited more than three months in the vain hope his incapacity would disappear. But at length he became assured, that without professional assistance, habit and time would probably make his debility permament, and under these circumstances it was that we first saw him. He informed us, that the only dread he was accustomed to feel from indulgence in self-pollution in days gone by, arose from the growing sense of very indefinable feelings, which when present in their greatest severity powerfully affected his stomach, producing nervous indigestion of the worst kind, with horrible depression of spirits. But his feeble powers as a husband were now traceable by an accusing and remorseless spirit to the weakness of youthful years, and justly so. It was rendered evident he had long been subject to nocturnal emissions, but to this he had been accustomed to attach not the slightest importance, vainly imagining there was nothing of disease or unnatural debility in that unconscious discharge. However, the sense of increasing and apparently hopeless Impotence, rendered him at times so wretched that life became a burden, and, as he informed us, his misery was precisely of that description which could seek for no alleviation from reposing it with her who naturally felt the most affectionate interest in his welfare. On her account, he bitterly blamed himself, and never shall we forget the look of delight and wondering joy his countenance assumed when first we told him his case was not past remedy, nor will the hour be forgotten by either of us when first he came half wild and laughingly to tell that he felt returning power. In possession of his entire confidence, and having obtained a knowledge of every fact bearing upon his case, we adopted such remedies the action of which tended to allay all morbid irritability of the seminal vessels, and under this treatment he steadily proceeded to the entire possession of sexual power. The nightly emissions were soon suppressed. Business required his presence in Scotland a few weeks; during which time, (though absent from his wife,) he corresponded with us, and with no difficulty had forwarded to him the necessary medicines. In less than three months this person was perfectly cured.





BARRENNESS.

Barrenness is such a state of a woman's body, as indisposes it, in the use of the natural means, to conceive and propagate her species. In may be properly reckoned among the diseases of females ; as few married women, who have no children, enjoy a good state of health.

Barrenness is decidedly a female disease, for though

L





there are deficiences, natural or incidental, in men, which will prevent their having children by women who would be very prolific if they were married to other men; yet barrenness, in the true sense and general acceptation of the word, is exclusively and altogeter a deficiency or disease peculiar to women.

The Cordial Balm of Zeylanica, three or four times a day, as the age and constitution of the patient may require, will warm and purify the blood and juices, increase the animal spirits, invigorate and revive the whole human machine, and remove the usual impediment to fertility.

THE TURN OF LIFE.

The menses generally cease to flow between forty and fifty years of age, which renders this period very critical, as it lays the foundation for many future diseases. So copious a drain being taken in the habit, without previous preparation, is the Bole cause of this danger. For want only of necessary care and attention during the time the menses vary, and give symptoms of their departure, many complaints ensue; among which are colds and chills, succeeded by flushings of the face, and heats of the extremities, restless nights, troublesome dreams, and unequal spirits, inflammation of the bowels, spasmodic affections, stiffness of the limbs, swelled ancles, sore legs, with pain and inflammation; the piles and other symptoms of plenitude. But all this might easily be prevented, by attention to a due regimen, and taking this truly valuable Cordial as frequent as occasion may require, according to the general directions.





As there may be some of our readers who may think the description given in this work, of the gross enormity and terrific consequences of indulging in the vicious habit of self-pollution, has been exaggerated by us, we shall take the liberty of adducing a few passages from Holy Writ itself, in corroboration of the sentiments expressed by us. The validity of an appeal to such an authority is irrefragable and undeniable, inasmuch as its truth is above impeachment, and its purity above suspicion. Nor shall we allow ourselves to be deterred from appealing to such a tribunal by the sneer of the infidel. The object we have proposed to ourselves in the composition of this work, is, we trust, good, and every legitimate means which we can employ to enhance its value, and recommend its perusal to the youth, and to the adults among our countrymen, we are determined to avail ourselves of. We all know that to different individuals, different species of proof bring different degrees of conviction: but in the present case, wherein we adduce observed, established and authenticated facts and results, and when we trace these facts and results by the process of analytical reasoning and by the laws of induction to their causes, and when we make it manifest that such causes are adequate to produce such and such effects; when in addition to all this human demonstration, we bring to our aid the word of God himself, who neither " can deceive, nor be deceived," unweildy and obdurate indeed must that man be, who can resist the combined force of such overwhelming authorities. We shall now, without further apology, adduce our proofs from Scriptures of the enormity of self-pollution.





St. Paul in his Epistle to the Ephesians, chap, v., verse 6, says—

"Let no man deceive you with vain words; for because of these things cometh the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience."

"Keep thyself pure," says the same Apostle: and again, " Unto the pure, all things are pure; but unto them that are defiled, nothing is pure, but even their mind and their consciences are defiled."—1 Tim., v. 22, St. Paul's first Epistle to the Thessalonians, chap, iv., v. 3, 4, 5, and 7. "For this is the will of God, even your sanctification that ye should abstain from fornication. That every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in sanctification and honour. Not in the lust of concupiscence, even as the Gentiles which know not God; for God hath not called us unto Ubcleanness, but unto holiness." Epistle to the Romans, chap, xiii., v. 13,—" Not in chambering and wantonness." Walk not," says he, " as other Gentiles walk, who, being past feeling, have given themselves over to lasciviousness, to work alluncleanness with greediness.'" Ephesians iv., 17, 19, Chap, vi., v. 15.—'* Know ye not that your bodies are the members of Christ f Shall I then take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an harlot? God forbid" 1 Corinthians chap, iii., v. 16—" Know ye not that your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you, which ye have of God, and ye are not your own?" And in the same to the Corinthians; chap, iii, v. 17.—" If any man define the temple of God, him shall God destroy, for the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are." ,

But if it Was not revealed to us that God is highly offended at all manner of uncleanness: when we reflect on the end of marriage in all countries, and in all societies, and the manner after which God has ordained that our species should be continued, natural religion and our own reason would instruct us, that to destroy that end must be very offensive to God; that the crime in itself is monstrous and unnatural; in its practice filthy and odious to extremity: its guilt is crying, and its consequences ruinous; it destroys conjugal affection, prevents natural inclination and tends to extinguish the hopes of posterity.





In the foregoing pages, it has been proved that the hurt which either sex may receive from self-pollution, is corporeal as well as spiritual: because those who once committed this act have in a grievous manner offended God, and although many of strong constitutions may for some time have been guilty of this sin, without any perceptible harm to their bodies, yet how to redress the spiritual injury received, shall be our first and chiefest care. There is no Christian who can be ignorant, that nojpardon can be obtained for this as well as other sins, without repentance in general; but many are apt to deceive themselves concerning the nature of repentance, as not well knowing in what it consists; wherefore it is requisite something should be said of the manner after which this duty ought to be performed, as well as the necessity of it.

The repentance of those who are polluted by this

sin, should remain with them to their lives' end. These

are not sins which a man can forget, and the memory

of them ought to be always fresh, that the penitent

may truly say with David, "My sins are ever before me." Not only the time that has past since the commission of it, but even the amendment of life, does not take away the sense of so great a fault; but on the contrary, he becomes more and more sensible of it. Even this, though the sinner has had the happiness to obtain the pardon of his guilt, will render the remembrance of it the more bitter; and the greater progress he makes in holiness, the more abominable will his wickedness appear. The greater experience he has had of God's love, the more he will accuse and loath himself; and the more hope he has of salvation through God's mercy, the more will he be affected with the danger of being excluded from it, to which he had exposed himself.





Another great duty that belongs to repentance, is, the guilty must forsake their sin. When our Blessed Saviour pardoned the woman taken in adultery, he said to her " Go, and sin no more." The crime must therefore be totally renounced; and they which do not this, but relapse into it, have not repented of it. Every act, and every repetition of their sin, is an aggravation of both their guilt and punishment.

Before concluding, we think it right to mention that, in many instances, patients who have in early life indulged in the habit of self pollution, are frequently, many years after they have abandoned the pernicious habit, annoyed and rendered wretched by the consequences which it has left behind it. Such persons are troubled with involuntary discharges, pains in the back and limbs, and several other anomalous symptoms, which the experienced practitioner will at once refer





to their true origin. To such persons we would earnestly recommend an immediate recourse to the Cordial Balm of Zeylanica. The success which is to be derived from its use, is of such a nature as to insure to the patient a restoration to strength and vigour.

GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR TAKING THE CORDIAL BALM OF ZEYLANICA.

In all cases where the Cordial Balm Of Zeylanica. is administered, the patient should take one table spoonful half an hour before breakfast; about eleven o'clock; five in the evening; and about an hour after supper; by itself, or in a wine-glass full of water, until health is perfectly renewed. And when the Cordial Balm of Zeylanica is taken for the cure of weakness, and debility, deficiency of natural strength, and relaxation of the vessels, by too frequent indulgence of the passions, Brodie's Purifying Vegetable Pills should be administered also, in doses of two Pills at night, and one in the morning.

Sold in Bottles at 1 Is. each, or four quantities in one Family Bottle for 33s. by which one lis. Bottle is saved.

In respect to the Cordial Balm of Zeylanica, it should be understood, that its effects on the various complicated diseases are as surprising and singular as the means by which we became acquainted with it; we therefore wish to impress upon the minds of patients taking the same, not only is perseverance necessary, aa it corrects and purifies the whole mass of blood and juices, but because it is not at all uncommon for the patient to take half the quantity for a radical cure, before he perceives Any material benefit.





SECONDARY SYMPTOMS.

In the treatment of secondary symptoms, it must not be forgotten that the disease is not merely superficial and local, but constitutional; therefore efficient remedies that may cause a happy change in the constitution must be administered; temporary relief is of no avail, for when these medicines cease to have any influence, the alarming symptoms reappear in an aggravated form. In a former part of this book we have fully expressed our opinions respecting the indiscriminate use of mercury; our experience convinces us, if the disease is treated judiciously at the commencement, there is no fear of danger; but, by throwing into the system quantities of that mineral without skill or judgement, produces a host of evils.

The following fully illustrates this position—a blacksmith a short time since presented himself at our establishment, from Croydon, in Surrey, about thirtytwo years of age. When he addressed us, we could scarcely distinguish what he said, from the peculiar hoarseness of his voice and the impediment in his articulation, caused, as we afterwards perceived, by the total extinction of his palate. Every part of his body was covered with a copper-coloured eruption—(see engraving,) the pains in his limbs, particularly at night, were excruciating. On examining his mouth





and throat, we found the palate consumed, and the tonsils very much inflamed, and he complained of great difficulty in swallowing.

He acknowledged, about a twelvemonth before applying to us, he had ulcers in the glans of the penis, and took some preparations from a druggist in the town, a friend of his , after taking them about eight days his mouth became sore, and the chancres disappeared; he now congratulated himself on his recovery—but how soon did he perceive his error! for in a short time he found his mouth dreadfully ulcerated; he had advice at Croydon, was again salivated, rapidly grew worse, and was in the state above described when we first saw him. In treating this case we used the remedies peculiar to ourselves, with the usual happy results.





We will now conclude our illustrations,—for what is the utility of trying our reader's patience, and causing unnecessary pain by a minute recital of incidents that daily come under our observation. Surely what has been already stated must be sufficient to convince the most reckless of the serious results arising from an indiscriminate indulgence of the passions, and pursuing a path where sensuality and licentiousness are the guides, driving their deluded victims to acts attended with the most fearful consequences.



s.



Expressly addressed to those requiring Professional

Aid and Advice, and mho are suffering from Bis

ease and the direful effects of an Unrestrained

Indulgence of the Passions.



How severe are the mental sufferings and bodily infirmities eventually experienced by the sensualist and votary of pleasure? Thus are they stopped in the midst of their career, yearning in dispair for those ardent and inexplicable delights which sad experience has at length taught them is the only true and substantial bliss. To such as these we now address ourselves. Indeed, ''man is prone to evil from his youth,"—producing that frailty which blinds his understanding, and makes him so short-sighted, as to become his own enemy; destroying that domestic felicity, a portion of which is alloted to every individual, whatever station he may sustain—if he values and cherishes the treasure. We implore those who have abused those privileges bestowed upon them, for the wisest of purposes, not to hesitate before it is too late, adopting every means to preserve and invigorate those powers, without which they are disqualified ^from fulfilling those blessings which are the greatest attributes of man. To persons thus circumstanced our knowledge and experience are dedicated—to them we offer our advice and assistance, with every assurance of observing that integrity and honour to the utmost, which we have always blended with our professional pursuits.





Those important purposes are always most essentially answered by sea-bathing; for salt water ought to be preferred, not only on account of its superior gravity, but likewise for its greater power of stimulating the skin, which promotes perspiration, and prevents the patient from catching cold.

The use of the Cordial Balm Of Zbylanica, and sponging the body regularly every morning on first getting out of bed, is pointed out by the nature of their virtues ; they produce the same effects ; and being combined, will cure disorders which every other remedy would only have increased, Being strengthening, sedative, and febrifugal, they re-invigorate, diminish the feverish and nervous heat: calm the irregular motions produced by the spasmodic disposition of the nervous system; fortify a weak stomach, and quickly dissipate its attendant pains; they restore appetite, facilitate digestion and nutrition, promote all the functions, and particularly perspiration, which renders them so efficacious in all catarrhous and cutaneous disorders. In a word, they remove all the disorders occasioned by weakness, provided the patient is not afflicted with indissoluble obstructions, inflammations, nor internal ulcerous abscesses, which conditions almost necessarily exclude the operation.





The blood being poisoned in scrofula, leprosy, and the Venereal Disease and its consequences, it is necessary to introduce into the stomach, medicines which will have the effect of immediately counteracting the destructive effects of the poison circulating in the veins; for this purpose the

PURIFYING VEGETABLE PILLS,

AND

CORDIAL BALM OF ZEYLANICA,

have been invented and used for many years by Messrs. Brodib with the most unprecedented success. The Cordial Balm Op Zbylanica effectually destroys any poison which may be in the blood, and thereby cures disease. How can health exist, when the very life of the blood is poisoned? And is it natural to expect that one poison in the body can be removed by introducing another? The Pills, by coming immediately in contact with the coat of the stomach, are carried directly to the blood, which they purify; and in consequence of which, cure those distressing diseases to which the human frame is liable, as scurvy, scrofula, venereal disease, Sec, possessing the power of eradicating every symptom of the disease in its worst stage, without the least exposure to the patient, and when no other remedy can restore the unhappy sufferer to that health which he unfortunately lost, the Purifying Vegetable Pills will be found the only effectual and radical remedy.





These Pills are mild and effectual in their opera* tion, without mercury or mineral, and require no restraint in diet, loss of time, or hinderance from business.



CONCLUDING OBSERVATIONS.

The cases we have selected for publication abundantly prove, that exclusively of the facilities afforded for frequent personal interview, which, with the closest regard to privacy, may always be obtained at our own establishment in Birmingham, our resources are not less in the treatment of patients who can only correspond with us through the post. Our country correspondents may rely on the application of our prompt attention and skill in reference to the slightest peculiarity of their complaints. For when it is considered at what distance medical aid has often to be procured, and that the multifarious engagements of a country practitioner naturally preclude that minute attention to so important a subject, which can alone secure to the patient a certainty of health; our method is of double utility, by the Secrecy which it offers and the relief it ensures.

In conclusion, we beg to suggest a practical extension of the benefits we have endeavoured to inculcate. It will be an acceptable service to society, if the reader who has attentively, and, we hope, usefully perused these pages, will forward, with as much privacy as may be, under envelope, anonymously or otherwise, our little work, to such of his friends or acquaintances who, as he may have good reason either to know or suspect, have been the secret victims of the baneful habit we have described. In this way a parent may secretly, yet effectually, warn that child, to whom on such a subject he would feel it repulsive to speak. We need only point out this mode of performing a humane and charitable action, to render obvious its very useful application.





And now, under the full consciousness of a sincere and ardent wish to be instrumental in discharging our individual share of that obligation to society which is founded on our mutual dependance upon each other, we fearlessly confide our efforts to the discriminating eye of every enlightened, judicious, and philanthropic lover of his fellow man. For, to reclaim from destruction, to save from misery and pain, to restore to usefulness and happiness, is assuredly one of the highest rewards associated with the recollection of our past labours, and the noblest stimulus to future exertion. The grateful smile of returning health and renewed vigour, will be to us, as they have ever been, a happy compensation for studious efforts. We feel that we have not failed to consult the real interests and permanent happiness of those who have entrusted themselves to our care; and it is our earnest hope, that the wide publicity of our present undertaking may be directly conducive to the promotion of the health, com fort, and welfare of the victims of weakness, anguish, and decay.





Wolverhampton, Jan. 4, 1841. Sir,—I have carefully read your published work, and from the similarity of its descriptions to my own sad condition, I am inclined to hope you may be instrumental towards my recovery. Allow me to submit to your candid consideration the following particulars, in order that I may avail myself of your professional advice and assistance. I had scarcely passed my eighteenth year, when I was first initiated into the dreadful practice of Self-pollution, and I make the admission with profound regret, that, without interruption, I was daily as well as nightly, in the habit of giving way to its vile excesses. It is now nearly eghteen months since I gave it up, but still I feel I am "made to suffer for the sins of my youth," I am exquisitely tortured with the consequences of that baneful indiscretion. While I was devoted to that propensity, I lived regularly enough; never allowed myself to fall under the influence of liquor, and as to the sex, I never felt any inclination for women, but rather repugnance. Indeed, a sort of nervous bashfulness always overcame me in their society; I never could assume the courage, to talk on any other than ordinary subjects with a female. My figure has always been considered small, so slender as to excite remark. I have always been subject to great determination of blood to the head, and the slightest unexpected shock, agitates and hurries me very much. My sight has long been weak; I fancy I hear the deep sound of water-mills, or the ringing of bells, or great hammers. I am very nervous; the noises in the streets annoy me excessively For a long time after Onanism had established its empire over my senses, this was the case with me; but I did not, until latterly, clearly suspect the cause. One evening, last winter, at the Birmingham theatre, I felt strangely giddy and dizzy, I suppose from an overflow of blood upon the brain; I fell, and completely fainted away. Mustard poultices were applied by a young surgical friend, down the course of the spine. I cannot describe to you, what I suffered after this period. I became confused and bewildered, as though some dreadful calamity was suddenly impending, or as though the avenging arm of justice was about immediately to alight on my devoted head. I refused food; became thin very rapidly; sleepless—my eyes assuming a red ferrety appearance, from want of rest, and high nervous irritation. A deep pain in the chest, and a hollow cough again brought my surgical attendant to my side; I dared not tell him, I had not strength enough to relinquish the cause of my suffering, and yet it was so. My father urged me to try the sea air; and certainly, change of scene, and the little exercise I have been able to take, have done, perhaps, some good: but that which troubles me most just now, and, I think, keeps up the dizzy predicament of my brain, is that if I ride on horseback, the friction of the saddle—or if I stand before a fire, the warmth produces even by day involuntary emissions of the seed, or at least, of a thin watery fluid; and in the night, I am apt to have conconfused lustful dreams, when the same thing will happen. As you may suppose I am entirely unfit for sexual intercourse, not having had an erection for a





very long period. I have not detailed these symptoms, perhaps, in the clearest and most orderly way, but I think it is correct; and if you are of opinion, I am not beyond the reach of relief, I shall be happy to be assured, that you can be of service to me.

Your obedient servant, R. J. Brodie, Esq. C. J.



We lost no time in enforcing upon this unfortunate patient, the positive necessity of his abandoning his unmanly and destructive habit; and when fully satisfied that this was done, we undertook the management of his case, and by the operation of such medicines as were required in so extreme an instance, we had the satisfaction of succeeding in about ten weeks, in effecting his entire restoration to health.

Of all the dangerous gratifications, that strew the path from youth to manhood, none are so mischievous as the indulgence in Onanism.

No practice, exercise, or occupation, so disturbs the free and equal circulation of blood in the brain as masturbation. The blood may be quickened in particular parts of the system without the whole circulation participating in such a disturbance, but when that is the case, the neighbouring parts to those affected, are deficiently supplied, and consequently their functions become perverted or temporarily paralyzed. We know not how the communication between the cerebellum (the supposed regulator of the amative feelings) is connected with the organs referred to, but we do know that the hind part of the head indicates, by certain symptoms, such as heat or pain, and, phrenologically speaking, hy size and form, the state and character of the genital organs, and we farther know, that when those organs are in a state of undue excitement or disease, the circulation of the blood in the cerebellum is disturbed, and if increased, the other parts of the brain receive a less supply, and if diminished, on the contrary. Hence arises an altered action in some parts of the brain to the detriment of the proper and correct working of its functions: the effects are sad estrangements from healthful feelings. The perceptive and reflective faculties, abiding in the anterior and upper part of the brain become weakened or deranged, and hence all the morbid sensations that harass the sensualist. We are capable of enduring a certain amount of fatigue or enjoyment, day by day: the excess of one may be relieved by rest on the second: but it is possi ble to overtax our capability, and no reaction can be commanded. We know the vast complication of organs engaged in a single phenomenon of perception, reflection, or bodily movement, but they are obedient to natural demands. Let us think for a moment how we overstetch our powers, when we are obliged to call all our imagination to aid us in producing a sensation, that instinct properly directed could furnish in an instant without labour or fatigue, but which, when sought for as it is, by a process is at variance with the recognized notions of decency and recitude. To crush so devastating a habit, the picture should be drawn as it really is. As a setoff against the pleasing illusion, the desolating effects





should be well displayed. Almost all cases that have fallen under our notice of nervousness and feeble health, of inaptitude for bodily and mental occupation, of loss of manly power and deficiency in the generative function, the parties have more or less acknowledged to have been misled at one time or another by this corroding infatuation. To such persons we would earnestly recommend an immediate recourse to the Cordial Balm of Zeylanica. The success which is to be derived from its use, is of such a nature as to insure to the patient a restoration to strength and vigour.

GONORRHEAL RHEUMATISM.

A young tradesman contracted a clap which he himself treated, as he stated, with tolerable success, that is to say, he got well(f) within six months. His cure consisted of a suppression of the discharge at least, except occasionally a slight oozing of a little matter from the orifice of the penis, in the morning, perhaps, once a week, or oftener if he lived freely: but the cause of his application to us was to obtain relief from a vexatious and sudden rheumatic attack. (We are describing his case from his own narration.) He went on to say, that the pains were not constant, that sometimes for days he was free from them, and then again for a week he was tormented with them—they were most severe in his loins, back, and hip joints; his ankles and feet, at other times, were excessively painful, compelling him to use a crutch for support, and as to getting rest or sleep at night, it was impossible. He had taken "loads" of physic, had become very thin, and he was much enfeebled, so as with the greatest difficulty only to be able to follow his occupation. Gonorrhoeal rheumatism differs very little from ordinary rheumatism; they both doubtlessly spring from the same cause although differently named; and that cause is cold taken by a patient in delicate health, and . predisposed for the particular disturbance. The only difference between ordinary rheumatism, and rheumatism ensuing after gonorrhoea, is, according to our experience and belief, that on the latter occasion the disease is less severe on account of the health being reduced only temporarily and by medicine, which state of health may be speedily recovered when the medicine is omitted, whereas in ordinary rheumatism, the attack is generally confined to persons of long-continued failing health, and which is decidedly the more difficult to treat as speedily and successfully as the gonorrhoeal rheumatism. However, doctors differ, not only in their notions of disease, but also of treatment, and in few complaints is there greater diversity than in rheumatism. Rheumatism is inflammation of particular structures of the body, and these structures are generally the tendonous coverings of joints, the sheaths or "quilts" of muscles, and the various membranes: there are various degrees of inflammation, and, according to the amount, so corresponds the general disturbance: the treatment must be modified by circumstances. The severer the symptoms the more active the remedial measures. Some cases demand leeching, bleeding, and other kinds of depletion: others may be subdued by medicine. The case under consideration yielded to the last-named means in a surprisingly short time. The cure, however, might have been protracted to an indefinite period, had not attention been paid to the gleet. Upon examination it was found that there was an excrescence within the eighth part of an inch of the orifice of the urethra, besides several irritable spots at different distances in the passage; local irritations of these kinds tend much to injure the general health, and we have known many morbid feelings to disappear on the removal of a urethral discharge, a stricture, or on the subsidence of vesical irritability: the inflammatory symptoms, which were not extraordinarily severe in this instance, were controlled by temperate diet, rest, and a course of the Cordial Balm of Zeylanica and the Purifying Vegetable Pills: the Patient was restored to perfect health in three weeks.





We have not to travel far upon time gone by to recal an instance of the prevalence of this unfortunate annoyance. In the course of last summer we were in attendance upon a patient, the narration of whose case will afford a good delineation of the severity, duration, and treatment of the infirmity in question. The gentleman was between five and six and twenty years of age. He was the son of opulent parents, and had past the earlier portion of his life at a collegiate school, where he acquired the habit of lonely abuse. On emerging in the world, his propensity gained pace with his years, and he rarely suffered a day to elapse without resorting to it once at least, or more occasionally. Having no necessity to settle to any fixed employment,





the time hung most heavily upon his hands. Whether in town or country, he was a lounger among his friends and acquaintances. Although opportunities were not wanting to hold intercourse with females, yet fear of a two-fold nature kept him aloof from such an enjoyment :—the fear that he might not succeed, for the first and only attempt at actual intercourse with one of the sex, was a failure, owing to the sudden escape of the seminal fluid before he could effect the necessary entrance —and the fear of contracting some infectious disorder. He therefore persevered in his pernicious indulgence, aiding his excitation by the perusal of works of an immoral tendency. The first notion that he had that the habit he had encountered was absolutely injurious in a physical point of view was that his nights were disturbed, and that he had occasionally nocturnal seminal emissions, many of which he became not aware of, until getting up to dress in the morning. The day after such an occurrence, he felt unhinged, he experienced also considerable lassitude, and a disinclination to stir out. His appetite remained dormant until the afternoon, when he found he required stimuli to arouse him. One bad habit generally engenders another. To seek relief from this new feature, this growing hypochondriacism, he sought the pleasures of the table, and took more plentifully than salutarily of wine. His desire to indulge in his old habit had considerably diminished, not having the same wishful feelings as formerly, but the nightly attacks of unconscious discharge increased in frequency and unpleasantness. His health began to





decline, his appearance was much altered, and the family professional adviser -was consulted. Not being informed of the true state of the case, but most likely suspecting it, he gave an opinion that it was owing to general debility, probably depending on ennui, idle habits, and London confinement. A trip was suggested; change of air was sought, and a twelvemonth was consumed in travelling about. The malady, although somewhat abated, was not removed—besides, an additional gloom had overcome the patient. Among the visits he had made, several were paid to friends (early associates) who had become benedicts, and many inducements had presented themselves that he should imitate their example. The fear of his unfitness appalled and harrassed him exceedingly. He had abandoned, from positive loss of inclination, his youthful fatuity, but he was more annoyed than ever with the unsolicited night attacks of seminal discharge. He stated that such was the profuson that the clothes near his person conveyed an idea that some vessel of water had been upset. The secretion was thin, of a dirty tinge, and emitted a faint and mawkish odour. A friend, at this time, recommended him to consult us. His appearance certainly betokened his complaint; he was pale and care-worn, as though overtaken by trouble and time. His hands were cold and damp, as were also his feet; his pulse languid, his skin dry and shrivelled, flesh flabby, and his whole look that of a consumptive person. He had no cough, but the slightest exercise, even ascending a staircase, accelerated his breathing, and occasioned a quickened movement of the heart. We immediately recommended a course of the Cordial Balm of Zeylanica which we are happy to say restored him to perfect health and vigour in one month.





11. I. aged 20, of slender frame, sunken eyes, pallid countenance, and considerable emaciation, stated that when placed at a public school, at the age of twelve, he had been induced by his school-fellows to indulge in the habit of self-pollution, from the effects of which he had been suffering up to the present period, though he had completely abandoned the practice for the last year and a half; he now complains of dizziness of the head, uncontrollable lethargy, tremors in the hands and knees, pains over the abdomen, pain and weakness in the back and loins, and of constant involuntary emissions both by night and day; total loss of appetite, amounting to an absolute aversion to food of every kind; he is entirely disinclined to make any bodily exertion ; when in a sitting posture he is restless and cannot keep himself in one position for any length of time ; his vision is very much impaired; memory also decayed; has got a slight dry cough with occasional pains in the chest, and violent palpitations when he exerts himself.

Referring all these symptoms to their proper and obvious cause, we prescribed the necessary medicines and diet, under which he recovered slowly; but still is considerably relieved and improved, and will, if he perseveres in his present course, be perfectly restored to health.





. A gentleman, whose profession was that of a musician, unmarried, and residing in lodgings at the west end of the town, unfortumately contracted severe gonorrhoea, for which he had taken without advice, many of the ordinary remedies in large doses; and, failing to receive any benefit from them, had commenced the use of a stimulating and irritating injection. After employing it three days, the discharge suddenly stopped, but while congratulating himself upon the supposed cure of his disease, he was surprised to find great pain in the loins and each testicle, down the whole course of the urinary canal and in the bladder, with frequent and painful desire to make water, which he was only able to evacuate in a minute stream or in drops. In this state the patient consulted us; and after reversing all that he had done, the discharge for a few days re-appeared. The more acute symptoms gave way to our treatment, and in a fortnight the gleety mucous drain from the urethra, which had so long troubled him, entirely subsided. He recovered without a single bad symptom, after taking three bottles of the Cordial Balm of Zeylanica, and the Purifying Vegetable Pills.



To Messrs. BRODIE & Co.,

Gentlemen,—With heartfelt gratitude, I return you sincere thanks, for the wonderful benefit I have experienced from your salutary advice and highly valued





medicine. About three months since, having unfortunately contracted the venereal disease, and not regarding it at the time as anything material; till at length, I suddenly found myself plunged into the deepest misery; for I at last discovered that my blood was impregnated with that distressing disorder: nodes on my shin bones, ulcerated throat, diseased nose, with pains in my head, till at length a general debility and decay of the constitution ensued, and had I not persevered in the use of your Purifying Vegetable Pills and Cordial Balm of Zeylanica, death would have put an end to my miserable existence long before this. But, happily for me, receiving one of your publications, I applied, (if you recollect,) at the Establishment in Birmingham, and you immediately prescribed a course of Zeylanica, (which to speak plainly, I put very little faith in, having tried so many patent medicines in vain). After taking one bottle at 33s. I perceived little or no benefit; however I did not despair, but continued to proceed according to the directions, but how great was the surprise of my friends, and my own astonishment, when in the course of a short time, I discovered wonderful improvement, and an entire alteration jn my whole person. Nothing could exceed my joy, as my prospects in life are great, I continued the Cordial Balm of Zeylanica for two months, with the Purifying Vegetable Pills, and was restored to health and strength, which I had long been a stranger to; and those unhappy persons who may be labouring under this destructive disease, should take time to consider the dreadful consequences arising therefrom, and make immediate application for your superior advice, and much esteemed medicines.





I remain, dear Sirs, Your ever grateful and oblged, Hockley Road. H. G.



TO MESSRS. BRODIE AND CO., SURGEONS.

Gentlemen,—Your book gives me confidence freely to disclose to you some particulars relative to myself. I feel as though I could break the ice best by letter, and if afterwards, it be deemed by you more advantageous that I should avail myself of a personal interview, I will gladly come to Birmingham for that purpose.

It is now about five years since I first became habitually addicted to a practice, which I will not more minutely specify. During the last few months I have not indulged so frequently, for two reasons, partly from fear that it might cause some indefinable detriment, but chiefly from really increasing debility, and such a host of diseased feelings and positive ill health, as proved quite sufficient to destroy the lustful desires in which the act originates. My general symptoms have been lowness of spirits, heaviness, wandering pains of a severe character, in various parts of my body, but chiefly my head and back, as well as down the backs of my thighs. The circumstance that renders me most uneasy just now, is a strange unnatural coldness and weight affecting one of my testicles, hardly amounting to pain, and I notice that these bodies hang more loosely than natural, the skin covering them is never tightly puckered up as formerly, and I seldom or never experience a natural erection. With this I ought to mention, that I have a difficuly in making water, sometimes it suddenly stops, or I feel an urgent desire frequently in the course of a few hours, yet can only void a little, and that occasionally with severe effort and after waiting several minutes. There is a discharge falls on my linen which resembles the white of egg more than any other fluid, with which I can compare it, being quite clear and slightly glutinous. The penis is exceedingly relaxed, and I fancy smaller than formerly, the extremity of the foreskin is reddened, sore, and excessively tender, and a very unpleasant foetid discharge is apt to form in the bend of either groin, with an inflamed dryness of the skin that for a day or two precedes it. From the weakness of my seminal organs I am apt to lose seed in my sleep, fancying at such times I am clasping in my embrace some person or other on whom my thoughts have turned during the day. I am rapidly becoming thinner, I think my blood is impoverished, and quite expect that time will be necessary, under the most favourable treatment to restore my health ugain. I have not, as yet, entirely renounced my old habit, occasionally, but not very frequently it overcomes me. If your medicines are to be serviceable to one who is circumstanced in the same way as myself, I shall be glad to continue this correspondence, or as I before stated, to solicit a personal consultation. Your reply will oblige,





Yours, truly, M. D.





T. S., aged 25, of rather a stout make, and inclined to be corpulent, had been placed at a public school, when about the age of thirteen or fourteen, where he had been led into the practice of self-pollution. To this habit he adhered almost without intermission till he attained his twenty-second year, when becoming sensible of the sad ravages which it was committing on his constitution, he gradually discontinued the habit, and has now relinquished it altogether; he is affected, however, with head-aches, dizziness, dimness of vision lassitude and weakness of the loins, aversion to all exertion, whether bodily or mental, and profuse nocturnal emissions. As this gentleman resides a considerable distance from Birmingham, he consulted us by letter, having stated to us the above particulars. We undertook his cure, and were ultimately successful j he recovered perfectly, and wrote to us the following note: —

August, 24, 18 . Sirs,—It would argue not a little ingratitude in me whom you have by your judicious treatment restored to perfect health and strength, were I not to express my grateful acknowledgements to you for the prompt attention which you paid to my communication, and the great judgment and success with which you treated what I feared would prove a hopeless case. Believe me, Sirs,

Yours gratefully, June 1, 1842. Charles. CONCLUDING OBSERVATIONS.





Having now brought this brief summary of the disastrous results of Sensualism to its termination, and having selected a few, from among many illustrative cases, as depicting, by example, the truths we have advanced, we would wish our efforts to be regarded more especially by the young, as a brief warning, and faithful outline of the sufferings incidental to unnatural and vicious indulgence: so that they may be in possession of those necessary cautions against the prevalence of a vice, not more detrimental to themselves, than to the interests and welfare of the whole community. The consequences of self-pollution, have been often, not merely overlooked, but too frequently misunderstood or unseen. This happens, in some measure, from the absence of that confidence on the part of the patient, who hesitating to reveal the secret cause of their disorders, act unfairly by their medical advisers: but, in the majority of instances, professional men themselves are so unaccustomed to seek such inquiries, to detect the sources of disease that they escape unnoticed. There is a wide range of morbid sympathies closely connected with the practices of the solitary Sensualist. Under this conviction, we have unremittingly devoted all our time and energies to the prosecution of such inquiries as bear closely upon the mitigation, as well as the prevention of these forms of human suffering.





COUNTRY PATIENTS



are informed that, by forwarding their communication, per post or otherwise, they can have the remedies applicable to their several disorders forwarded "by initials" to any part, in a portable compass, carefully secured from observation, and they may be taken without confinement, loss of time, or hinderance from business. Patients are requested to be as minute and exact as possible in the detail of their cases, as to the duration of their complaint, the symptoms, age, generaj habits of living, and occupation in life of the party. The communication must be accompanied with the usual consultation fee of one pound, or a Post-office order to that amount, to ensure its safety; without which, no notice whatever can be taken of their application; and in all cases the Most Inviolable Secrecy may be relied on.

N. B.—Messes. BRODIE & Co. beg leave to impress on Country Patients, the expediency, nay, in many cases, the absolute necessity of affording them, where it is at all practicable, at hast one personal interview); the advantages which would result to the patient from such an arrangement by enabling them to form a clearer and more precise judgement of the nature and character of each case, would much more than repay the patient for the trouble of one journey to Birmingham, by the increased certainty and celerity of the cure.





NOTICE TO PATIENTS.



The Authors of this work having for many years past devoted their attention solely to the treatment of disease affecting the urinary and sexual organs, nervous and dyspeptic complaints, marked by despondency, mental delusions, morbid sensations, local and constitutional debility, &c, beg to inform those so suffering, that one of the firm,

MAY BE PERSONALLY CONSULTED AT THEIR

ESTABLISHMENT,



No. 4, GREAT CHARLES-STREET,

FOUR DOORS FROM EASY-ROW,

BIRMINGHAM,

PUNCTUALLY FROM ELEVEN IN THE MORNING UNTIL

EIGHT IN THE EVENING,

AND ON SUNDAYS FROM ELEVEN TILL ONE.

ONLY ONE PERSONAL VISIT FROM A COUNTRY

PATIENT IS REQUIRED.



In consequence of the high repute and extensive Sale of Messrs. Brodie's Medicines, it has induced many unprincipled individuals to foist upon the public illicit and spurious Compositions of their own preparation. Messrs. Brodie, therefore beg to inform persons purchasing their Medicines, that none are genuine unless the signature of R. J. Brodie & Co. is affixed on the outside of each wrapper.





About this Book - From Google

This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project to make the world's books discoverable online. It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume may appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the publisher to a library and finally to you.

Google Book Search has digitized millions of physical books and made them available online at the Google Books web site. The digitization at the most basic level is based on page images of the physical books. To make this book available as an ePub formated file we have taken those page images and extracted the text using Optical Character Recognition (or OCR for short) technology. The extraction of text from page images is a difficult engineering task. Smudges on the physical books' pages, fancy fonts, old fonts, torn pages, etc. can all lead to errors in the extracted text. Imperfect OCR is only the first challenge in the ultimate goal of moving from collections of page images to extracted-text based books. Our computer algorithms also have to automatically determine the structure of the book (what are the headers and footers, where images are placed, whether text is verse or prose, and so forth). Getting this right allows us to render the book in a way that follows the format of the original book.

Despite our best efforts you may see spelling mistakes, garbage characters, extraneous images, or missing pages in this book. Based on our estimates, these errors should not prevent you from enjoying the content of the book. The technical challenges of automatically constructing a perfect book are daunting, but we continue to make enhancements to our OCR and book structure extraction technologies.

We hope you'll enjoy these books as much as we do.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.

We also ask that you:

Make non-commercial use of the files: We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for personal, non-commercial purposes.

Refrain from automated querying: Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

Maintain attribution: The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

Keep it legal: Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe.



About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences.





