This book made available by the Internet Archive.





/





i .V...





- r

'

.

•** ■





*





Primed by T; Gillet, Crown-court, Fleet-street, London.

PREFACE.

I have endeavoured in this edition to render it more perfect, by arranging the various improvements medicine has made since my last was published; and for this purpose have selected whatever I thought would be conducive to the advantage of the reader, both from ancient and modern authors. The advance of general science is the object I have in view, and which a reference to the two first volumes of The Spectator will, I flatter myself, fully elucidate ; particularly those articles relating to vaccination; for I certainly should have conceived myself extremely criminal, and completely at variance with the best interests of society and humanity, had I refused to the favourers of this new, and as yet imperfect doctrine, that fair discussion by which science can alone be advanced, and our condition meliorated. Hitherto the investigation has been conducted without design or consistence, for never did a greater mass of confusion

PREFACE.

exist upon any subject; yet every man who places not a firm reliance on the preventive power of vaccination,, is deemed an enemy to social order, because he does not lose sight of particular facts, in order to yield up his opinion to a general impression, resulting from partial reasoning. I do confess I feel myself at perfect liberty to differ in opinion from those hostile gentlemen to candour and liberality ; who feel offended because we do not receive a principle of their own creation, as one virtually fixed; and which principle as vet is a flash without a bolt; and I do maintain they attack the legitimate privilege of a Briton, when they calumniate rather than refute.

Such is the line that has been pursued to resist fact and subdue reason. Surely you are not aware how much you expose, by the bickering and lire of unnecessary and outrageous abuse of personal character, your new practice to danger. What must be the influence of such an altercation on the great body of the people ? A Society of Physicians, congregated to elucidate science and meliorate our condition, ought to have evinced a better respect for British feelings; and, as editors of an annual work, ought not to have been so lavish of personal abuse on a contemporary editor; and never did abuse come with worse grace from any body of men, who, with all the churlishness of Tin Edinburgh

PREFACE.

V

Review, possess neither its originality, judgment, or arrangement; and who, with the greatest insolence, propagate the most infamous falsehoods , and which I w ill take this opportunity of confuting to the world at large, for never did the palpable and fastidious operations of self-conceit more plainly disr play themselves than in this publication. Iheyhave stated in their work, the late Dr. Perfect has merely given a new title-page, &c. to his Annals of Insanity. I corrected some proof-sheets of the printer’s errors as it came from the press, of his fifth edition.

Is it by such ignominious dogmatism you expect to rise in public estimation ? If so, I will venture to affirm, by such assassin-like means you never will attain your end; ff unless the very impudence of your abuse should gain your work a temporary circulation among the malignant spirits of the day.” Such conduct ill accords with the purity of your prospectus. Like you, I claim the privilege of saying, “ I have pleaded the cause of humanity, and trust 1 have not pleaded in vain;” for, as tar as we have gone, I have reason to believe truth is on my side: the confirmation of our ipse dixit is yet in utero. Both sides of the question are yet involved in doubt; each have suffered by false information, and a predilection to error. Thus, after eleven years of mysterious practice, we are where we set out, totally unacquainted with the

vi

PREFACE.

specific power of vaccine matter; and as yet no plan has been laid down, no means poinled out, by which we can unequivocally be furnished with certain precision, what is the actual extent of vaccine preservation. For my part, I never obtrude my private opinion on the inclination of the parent.

I am led to believe, that when the constitution has really been infected by the vaccine matter, it wvll resist the \anolous action; but while I concede to this doctrine, that requires the aid of experiment and time to bring it to maturity, I would have it understood, 1 do not yet recognize in vaccination the prevention of small pox: and this is as much as can be expected, while vaccination has acquired no decisive confidence. It is to me a matter of no small consolation, amid this hostile clamour, when I reflect, that notwithstanding the severe scrutiny my opposition to vaccination has undergone, the prejudice and envy it has given rise to, the fulminating and wanton invectives the hour of trepidation and despondency gave birth to, the extensive circulation those very insignificant libels (that merit my pity rather than my indignation) that were fabricated with singular severity, to deprecate me in public opinion, have had; not one fact I have advanced has been controverted, not one argument invalidated. Thus, after the great advantage of re-

PREFACE.

VU

ceiving the sanction of Parliament, the arrangement of the different Jennerian stations, and the opportunity an eleven years of extensive, but superficial practice, must have given, vaccination has not yet furnished sufficient facts to establish its character of prevention, on that extended scale which alone can warrant society in its universal adoption. I am open to conviction, and though I am neither an infidel, a sceptic, or an alarmist, yet I must not meanly desert my principles, for the fear of continuing the victim of narrow and hypothetical reasoners; and particularly when an universal anxiety prevails, for supplying the place of fact by credulity. I certainly shall feel happy to see this question decided in the favour of vaccination, and will do all in my power to forward the views of the Royal College of Physicians in its introduction, but in its recommendation will not take upon me the responsibility of its success, and I congratulate Society, that at length this new practice is now placed under the direction of men well calculated to bring this important point to issue.

In my present work I have preferred utility to brilliance, and fact to hypothesis, so that the reader may acquire such information on this branch of medical surgery, as will be practically useful to him through life, and render an embarrassing situation less irksome.

Vlll

PREFACE.

Respecting* the action of syphilis in utero, I have said nothing in the body of ray work,, because when the disease is manifested by evident signs, fortunately for the happiness of mankind, the practitioner is at hand. I have only dwelt upon those symptoms that generally mark the disease in the adult; to the department of midwifery belongs the disease as connected with utero-gestation. I shall merely state, we have daily facts of the foetus being infected with the disease, during its continuance in utero; and the practitioner who treats those infantile diseases as syphilis, will best succeed. I have no doubt the disease and its resemblance have often been confounded one with the other, and that an absorption of the aphthous discharge from the mouth aud tongue of a young infant, may, by depositing a portion of its. virus, bring on diseases bearing strong resemblance to lues venerea. Though I admit thisinzps^jfacfo, yet Ido maintain, that the affinity they bear to each other, justifies the practitioner in the adoption of a modulated mercurial course, and which I am well convinced will guide the infant from disease to health.

I have endeavoured to acquire the best sources of information, by not only consulting every author v who has written upon these diseases, but have taken every opportunity of actual experience for my

PREFACE.

XI

guide; so as my (practical inferences may correspond with fact and analogy.

I shall esteem myself happy, if this performance is received with candour and indulgence, and sufficiently rewarded for my labour, if it facilitates the cause of humanity.

No. 10, Stanhope-street,

Newcastle-street,

Strand,

London.





VENEREAL DISEASE.

f. • ' I J

It has been the common custom of authors, under the head of the Venereal Disease, to place gonorrhoea and syphilis, or confirmed lues, as one and the same disease ; and this I presume has arisen, from a opposition that the same poison gives them both existence ; but I am of opinion, they are diseases, distinctly springing from matter, whose specific contagion is evidently very different: therefore, I shall consider them as two separate diseases ; but as they arise from an illicit connexion, to be the more clearly comprehended, I shall employ the term Venereal Disease, more as a class, than the name of the disease ; and as the preventive means are applicable to both diseases, I shall also give them under this general head.

I shall first state the reasons for supposing the diseases do arise from the action of different specific contagions. If the same poison produced both diseases, should we not expect to find, that a^man with a chancre on the glans penis would

B



uniformly communicate the gonorrhoea, or clap to a woman ; inasmuch as the poison is first applied to a secreting surface in a woman, and vice versa. With persons in the habit of promiscuous intercourse, this point is very difficult to ascertain; but with married people it may be reduced to a certainty; for when a married man in the incautious hour of inebriety, contracts a venereal infection, he has uniformly communicated the same disease to his wife ; evidence of this fact is but too frequently met with in private practice. If therefore, a man with a chancre on his penis was capable of exciting this critical evacuation, the question would long ago have been answered, as one case would have established the fact; but no such case in the annals of medicine can be found : will it be contended, that this is not more than presumptive evidence? if in the laudable pursuit of medical researches, an individual can produce a well authenticated fact, of the existence of a gonorrhoea having arisen from a chancre, down goes the contest and controversy, and I stand completely refuted.

No disease is so little in the power of the practitioner as gonorrhoea; sometimes it will spontaneously cease, without any means ; at other times it will equally surprize and distress us by consequences the most serious, when every proper remedy has been used.

I will now take the subject in a new iigi*



Were the matter exciting both diseases, specifically the same, chancres and other symptoms of lues Venerea, would follow want of cleanliness in gonorrhoea ; lor I am in possession of no reason, why the virus of gonorrhoea, in that case, by lying on the tender skin of the glans penis in men, and inside of the labia in females, should not pro- . duce chancre, or, on being absorbed into the system, occasion bubo, and the other constitutional affections; for ulceration, it is a known fact, is not requisite for the introduction of this subtle virus into the circulation; on a very careful examination of ancient and modern records, no satisfactory instance can be found that bears analogy to such a case : again, my researches admit me to state, that if the matter of lues venerea be capable of exciting gonorrhoea, we should expect to find the latter disease, attending chancres, situated at the orifice of the urethra; such are daily met with ; hut an instance of gonorrhoea having followed, I have never met with, or heard of: again, if gonorrhoea be the production of the matter of lues venerea, acting on a secreting surface, why is not the same disease generated when applied to the secreting surfaces of the palate, nostrils and gullet, instead of which the accurate observer will find chancres in these situations are uniformly excited.

In Scotland, it also appears, that the disease termed

B 2



lues venerea, lias existed for many years without being attended with gonorrhoea.

Mercury, the grand remedy of this disease, manifests no specific effects in cases of gonorrhoea, although attended with suppuration, and consequent ulceration, and therefore is not recommended even by those who contend for the identity of the poison. Yet I am of opinion mercury ought to be given in its first stage ; because, should other symptoms follow, the constitution is prepared to receive them.

Having thus stated my reasons, I leave their consideration for the public, requesting they will bear in recollection that the observations I have made are warranted by an extensive practice.

The most important object of this treatise is to inculcate on the mind of every individual the necessity of extinguishing the venereal virus, without injury to the constitution; past experience and past misfortune, it is hoped, will teach practitioners to unite to their own experience, the experience of others; for, as the sagacious Dr. Friend justly remarked, “ a man may practise and practise all the days of his life, and yet never be the wiser for his experience, if he neglects to make the proper observations which that experience might suggest to him; and it is not very likely he should be over nice in his observations, who constantly goes on

S



&

in his first track, and has no scheme but his own narrow notions in view." To prevent individuals falling into such hands, first induced me to write this treatise, that a blind credulity to a particular system might not hurry to a premature grave an unguarded individual, and to snatch him from the griping claws of deadly empiricism. 1 shall therefore endeavour to show the possibility every man has in his power, by due care and attention, to prevent the venereal virus affecting his constitution : how far success will crown those endeavours, must be left to the decision of a candid public.

Respecting the specific particles of the venereal virus, the researches of the chymist, and industry of the physiologist, have left us where they found us; for this hydra-headed monster is only known to exist in the constitution from the effects it produces ; experience, it is true, has taught us the utility of mercury, but experience has not yet explained its modus operandi on the venereal virus. Hence we may rationally infer, that the particles of this contagion are different from all others, and the affection is virtually virus, sui generis. The opinion of the enlightened Sydenham respecting diseases, here shines with peculiar lustre, and is particularly applicable to this disease : “ There are diseases,” says he, “ that come under the same genus, bear the same name, have the same symptoms in common, which, notwithstanding, being



of a different nature, require a different treatment the truth of the above authority must forcibly strike every attentive observer of the effects of the lues venerea, for there is no disease to which the human body is subject of which it does not partake in some of its most prominent stages. I shall proceed to give a brief description of the different species of the venereal virus as it arises in succession, with a general mode of treatment for the same.

From the sufferings of mankind, under this disease, it has been a favourite object ever since its appearance, to endeavour, by remedies, to prevent its attack. The remedies for this purpose have been very numerous, and it will be needless to tire the patient with a list of them. The most successful are those which proceed on the principle of decomposing the poison ; and the following forms are of this kind:

Take of muriate of mercury, one grain; dissolve it in a.pint of common spring water, and filter it through paper; of this solution, mix a little in a tea-cup of water; and if the mouth can bear it ■without pain, it is fit for use. A syringe is then to be filled with it, and injected into the passage, either of the female or male, retaining it there for about half a minute, after which, the external parts may be washed with the same solution, and the whole finished with washing it away with warm water. Another preventive is the caustic alkali;



a few drops put into water, of such strength that the tongue can bear without pain, may be used in the same manner as the former solution ; cleanliness itself will also have a considerable effect, independent of any remedy whatever ; and of this, women themselves, who are engaged in promiscuous connexions with the other sex, aie well convinced. Covering the glans penis with the strong mercurial ointment is another remedy which also may be applied with success, if applied before and after coition. Lime water, and a solution of the extract of lead, has also been used ; as well as lemon

juice, and diluted spirits.

Nay, the disease itself, as has been alleged by some writers, acts in a certain degree in its consequences as a preventive. lor where a person has suffered more than one attack, the parts become as it were habituated to the action of the poison, and are not so easily aflected as at first, for they lose in a certain degree that sensibility they originally possessed, and which tended to render therfi moie susceptible of infection. This is instanced by the ease with which a person, on his first entiance upon the pleasures of the town, becomes the victim of disease ; while the debauchee, or those accustomed to promiscuous indulgences, feel no inconvenience from their various illicit intercourses, even where it is hardly possible but infection must have been present.



From the first appearance of the venereal disease, such remedies have been considered of great service ; the daily occurrence, however, of the disease, after so so many, and various attempts to prevent its contagion, is the best proof of our ignorance respecting the Specific nature of this poison ; and though we may attempt by these means to guard against its effects, yet we should not let ourselves be lulled into a fatal security against its attack. I know of no author who has laid down rules sufficiently explanatory to a patient in the use of the syringe; therefore, to obviate an omission of no small consequence, I think the following will answer.

SYRINGE.

The patient, prior to using the injection, should make water; and, on the introduction of the sv-ringe with his left hand, let him grasp the bottom part of the penis, so as to prevent any portion of the injection descending into the bladder: the injection ought to be repeated eight or ten times a-day ; for on laying aside the use of the injection, the running often returns where this has not been attended to. Patients should also be aware, when pain or swelling arise in either of the testicle*, their use is highly improper, as well as on the appearance of bubo,



OF CLAP.

Clap is a critical discharge from the urinary passage in the male, in consequence of the operation of a specific matter, and this generally happens with the last drops of seed of coition, which are apt to be retracted and carried back into the passage, as the parts collapse ; its first symptoms are a little redness and swelling at the orifice, which soon shows a watery discharge flowing from it, and becomes a running of a whitish or yellowish matter in the course of a little time ; the disease becomes then as it were established. The period of its appearance is generally from four to eight days after connexion, though in this there is no certain rule; for the symptoms will with some individuals discover themselves so early as twenty-four hours, and in other cases not for the distance of some weeks. The seat of the discharge is at first not above an inch and a half within the Oiifice of the passage, but it gradually proceeds upwards as the disease gains ground. It has been common in describing this affection or Clap, to divide it into three stages; the first stage is marked by a troublesome itching at the point of the yard, aud the orifice open, from which matter can be pressed. These appearances are succeeded by a swelling fuluess and tightness of the membrane; a sense



of heat pervades the whole passage, which changes to acute pain, anrl is severe on making water, producing what is termed scalding; along w ith these feelings in the part, the discharge undergoes various changes ; at first thin, and of a yellowish green colour, it changes to be more viscid, and i3 afterwards tinged with blood ; the member is also at times stiffened through its whole extent, or erected, in consequence of the inflammation producing what is termed chordce, from the irregular contraction or curvature of its under part. This circumstance is most frequent at night when w'artn in bed. Along with these symptoms of the part, there is sometimes felt a general uneasiness in the loins, testicles, and bladder, which not unfrequently affects the whole of the lower belly. If a Clap is left to itself, these symptoms will continue for a fortnight; at the end of that period they begin to abate, by the heat of the urine becoming less severe, by the discharge taking on a white appearance, and by the erections giving way. This is considered the second stage of the complaint; and when the abatement of the former symptoms proceeds still farther, so that the discharge is of a ropy viscid nature, then the disease is drawing to a termination, and a cure may be soon expected. Though in a Clap this cure would take place by the efforts of nature alone, without any interference of medicine, yet few patients could submit to the length of time



necessary for this, nor suffer the painful feelings to •which they must be subjected for a long period; besides, these symptoms, by harassing the constitution, might lay the foundation ot more seiious maladies, and in weakly habits would injure the person, by the continuance of the discharge. On the first appearance of the Clap, the cure should be immediately attempted; nor time lost till the disease has established itself. VY e shall not enter into the various methods which have been attempted for curing this disease; a patient requires to know hut one method, and it is the object Oi the author here to point out, from his owu experience, what he has found most successful. From the symptoms of inflammation which have been described, the first step is to abate this inflammatory state, by opening the bowels by the following cooling

purge :

Take of Epsom Salts, one ounce Nitre, half a drachm.

To be dissolved in a cupful of hot water, and to be taken at night. After the operation of this medicine, the regular use of the specific remedy is then to be begun, the preparation of which is as follows:

Take of White Sublimate, ten grains Sweet Spirit of Nitre, one ounce Compound Spirit of Lavender, thirty drops.



Mix the whole together, and of this mixture let fifteen drops be taken in a glass of water, morning and evening.

The effect of this medicine is to check the progress of the specific inflammation; and by this means the symptoms will of course abate. But though it thus mitigates all the other svmptoms, it does not possess an influence sufficiently powerful over the discharge. In addition, therefore, to the drops, a medicine, which it is necessary to join with them, is as follows :

Take of Wood, or Spurge Laurel Powder, and

Ohio Turpentine, each half a drachm.

To be made with fine flour into twenty-four pills, two of which are to be taken at night, and two in the morning ; which, besides checking the discharge, will have the effect of keeping the body gently open. By this practice the author has found an uniform success in curing the Clap; he does not deny, that there may perhaps be cases that will resist this, and every other remedy; but he will say with confidence, that he has never found this fail him, and on that account he is induced to recommend it to the use of patients in this strong manner. Should any of the symptoms resist this practice, particularly the chordee, then the following ointment is to be rubbed along the pipe, or under part of the member ;



Take of Mercurial Ointment, one ounce Powdered Opium, and Camphor, of each half a drachm.

To be mixed with the mercurial ointment, and the whole made thin by the addition of sweet oil, so as to form a liniment; a little of this is to be rubbed once or twice a day, as already recommended. Flannel soaked in cold water and put round the penis, will also remove it, and when the inflammation is very great, the following’ lotion used the Same as the water, will relieve :

Take one drachm of Sugar of Lead One drachm of the Tincture ot Opium And one quart of Water.

Where a patient is late in applying fcfr assistance, and symptoms of strangury, or difficulty of making urine, which passes only in drops, with much pain, comes on ; in this case the inflammation must be subdued before any other plan is attempted. If the pain is very severe, and the patient of a plethoric habit, bleeding will be necessary ; after which the following bolus may be taken, providedjjie body is already open, and if not, the cooling purge formerly recommended may precede it:

Take of Camphor, four grains Crude Opium, two grains

Conserve of Hips, as much as is sufficient to form it into a bolus.

Which is to be repeated every night, till the stran-



gury Is relieved ; and during the day, the following powders may be taken, to the number of two or three in the course of it:

Take of Powdered Gum Arabic, half a scruple Nitre, eight grains.

To be rubbed into powder, with a little white sugar, for one dose. When the strangury is relieved bv the above means, then the plan formerly directed must be had recourse to, in order to complete the cure. During the progress of every Clap, an attention to cleanliness cannot be too much recommended, by frequently washing the parts with lukewarm milk and water, to prevent the acrimony of the discharge, which is apt to fret the skin where it touches ; and to prevent this, it may also be proper to cover the point of the yard with a small bit of lint, to absorb the matter. Nor is regimen to be considered less necessary in the cure of the Clap, than the other heads of treatment; every thing that heats and stimulates the body increases the inflammation of the part, and promotes the discharge. All high seasoned foods are to be strictly avoided, and spirituous liquors of every kind. The patient should, confine himself to a mild nutritious diet, consisting chiefly of vegetable matter, in the form of pudding, and other light dishes; and when animal food is used, it should be boiled in the soluble form. The drink should consist of lemonade, and other diluent beverage, well acidulated with vege-



n

table acid, or cream of tartar. This restriction of diet will be more necessary in the first stage than afterwards ; as the symptoms of inflammation abate, the patient may indulge with a little more freedom, but should still be cautious to avoid excess: for no disease is so apt to suffer a relapse from irregularities in this respect as Clap. In enforcing attention to regimen, some regard must, however, be paid to the habit and constitution of the person. W here the habit is delicate and nervous, the restriction recommended would be apt to affect the general health, therefore it cannot be so rigorously complied with ; it must be left to the judgment of the patient what he can bear, and in these cases a due medium will be the best rule. In the above treatment the author has not introduced the use of injections ; he has seldom found them necessary. In the first stage of the disease they are certainly hurtful ; and if in the progress of it they are employed to hasten the abatement of the discharge, they should be very weak, in order to produce their effect gradually. If the patient, therefore, is anxious to get quit of the discharge, he may occasionally use a slight injection, of the following form :

Take of Sugar of Lead, eight grains White Vitriol, five grains Rose water, eight ounces.

Mix well together: a little is to be put into a teacup, from which a syringe is to be filled, and in-



i

jected three or four times a day, according to the discretion of the patient. In injecting it, a finger should be applied on each side the orifice of the passage, to confine the point of the syringe, and prevent the fluid escaping ; and after being retained a few seconds, the instrument is to be withdrawn. The effect of the injection will show the propriety of its use to the patient in a day or two. Some men have imbibed the beastly idea that the best way of getting rid of a clap,, is by connection with a healthy woman ,* the criminality and stupidity of such a notion is apparent, when we consider the nature and the seat of the disease, and can only arise from want of information on this point.

OF CLAP IN WOMEN.

The symptoms of Clap in women are pretty much the same as those in the male; but, from the different situations of the parts, and that the urine is not discharged by the same passage which forms the seat of the disease in men, they are not apt to arise to the same violence. Clap is, therefore, a milder disease in women than in men; the principal symptom in them, is the discharge; which is however, more apt to excoriate and fret the surrounding skin, than it does in men : the disease in them is also more difficult to cure. An attention to these differences, is all that is necessary to cure: in regulating the treatment, the same plan already



directed, must be put in practice ; but as the inflammatory symptoms are not so violent, the drops and pills can be almost immediately begun, and continued in a regular manner till the cure is completed. It may even be assisted by the use of injections; the best of which, in order to prevent the appearance of any stain on the linen, which might detect the complaint, is a.strong infusion of green tea ; an application which most women themselves know. In using it, it should be very frequently employed ; aud in order to be successful, the patient must place herself in a proper position, and her breech well elevated, and the syringe should be very broad pointed, so as accurately to fill the passage, and prevent the escape of the liquor till it has reached every part of the seat of the disease. So mild has this complaint often been known in the female, that a woman has given the infection for years to those who have cohabited with her, while no symptoms of it appeared, or were even known to herself. In every female case of lues venerea, mercury alone ought to be depended upon, because we cannot positively determine the source of the disease ; it may be only a gonnorhoeal discharge, but in case a concealed chancre existed, such a circumstance would materially injure the patient, while by treating it as syphilis w r e are sure to meet the disease.

c



PHYMOSIS AND PARAPIIYMOSIS.

I shall merely state what is meant by these terms, then proceed to their treatment.

Paraphymosis is a retraction of the praeputium penis behind the glans penis, so that it cannot be drawn over the glans, owing to too great a fulness of the glans, produced by inflammation, occasioned by venereal virus, or any other acrid humour lurking behind the glans, under the prepuce.

Phymosis is an inflammatory swelling of the prepuce, arising from the same causes as paraphymosis, occurring to such a degree of inflammation, as to render it impossible to draw the prepuce behind the glans.

Of all diseases to which the penis is subject, I know none more formidable than these, or more rapid in tbeir progress, for they too frequently terminate in the loss of a part, or of the entire penis. In the mode of practice that ought to be pursued here, practitioners have been divided ; some have recommended mercury, while others have equally condemned it. John Hunter, to whom ve must all look up with veneration, has left the question totally undecided ; we will give it in his own words :

“ In those cases, where violent inflammation has



attacked the seat of a chancre producing pbymosis as before described, and often so as to threaten mortification, a question naturally arises—Is mercury to be given freely to get rid of the first cause ? T\o-* thing but experience can determine this; I should incline to believe, that it is necessary that mercury should be given, for I am afraid our powers to correct such a constitution, while the first cause subsists, are too weak ; however, on the other hand, I believe the mercury should be given sparingly, for if it assists in disposing the constitution to such symptoms, we are gaining nothing, but may lose by its use ; I therefore do suppose, that such medicines as may be thought necessary for the constitution should be given liberally, as well as the specific ; bark is the medicine that probably will be of most general use; opium, in most cases of this kind, will also be of singular service ; the bark should be given in large quantities, and along with it mercury, whilst the virus is still supposed to exist; or if the inflammation has arisen early in the disease, they may then be given together, so as to counteract both diseases, and not to allow the inflammation to come to so great an height as it would otherwise do, if mercury was given at first alone. This inflammation may be so great in many cases, or be so predominant, that mercury may increase the disposition, and therefore become

c 2



hurtful. Where this may be supposed to be the case, bark must be given alone.”

The ambiguity of this language tends only to suspend the judgment of the practitioner, while the disease is hourly acquiring strength. 1 lay it down as an invariable rule, that in the actual presence of inflammation, attended with ulceration, phvmosis ought to be considered as an adventitious disease, completely independent of the original virus, which only here can be considered as predisposing the penis to an action of remote causes. The bark and the red wine will alone stop its progress, united to the usual mode of abating inflammation ; where the tendency to plethora is great, ten or twelve ounces of blood from the ariwwill tend considerably to abate the inflammatory action, the following draught ought also to be taken night and morning.

R Tartarisated Antimony, one grain.

Gum. Opium, one grain and a half. Tincture of Bark, two drachms. Peppermint Water, one ounce.

A poultice of carrots to be applied every six hours, until the inflammation is abated. Where inflammation alone exists, a sedative lotion may remove it ; and when the inflammation has subsided and the wound assumes a more healthy action, a mercurial course may be begun, half a drachm to be rubbed in each night. In all venereal cases I prefer the



introduction of mercury by this mode, and I am well convinced that less injury is done to the constitution by it, and that its effects are more certain, and this ought to be continued till the- mouth is well affected; when, till the chancre heals, the alterative course may he begun.

This mode of practice is adapted to both these states of inflammation ; paraphymosis is of a more alarming nature than the other, and often puts the patient’s life in danger; practitioners are too well ' acquainted with the plan that is to be pursued in cases of surgical operation to require information here, and the condition of the parts are too seriously affected to he left to the guidance of the patient, therefore, in every inflammation of the penis, the patient ought instantly to apply for medical aid ; and where serious injury arises, the patient has generally only to thank himself for his own negligence.

CHANCRE

Is a sore on the outer skin, in consequence of the application of venereal matter. This sore shows no disposition to heal: it becomes thickened at its base, and its inflammation extends : the time, after infection, at which it makes its appearance, is three or four days, though it is often as early as twenty-



four hours, and on other occasions it shows itself at the distance of some weeks ; it is preceded a sense of itching in the part, and its seat is most commonly within the foreskin or on the nut, though every part exposed to infection may be equally occupied bv it. Persons subject to fissures of t ic foreskin, arc particularly liable to the complaint and can hardly escape the infection when expose to it. The constitution of the person determines much the appearance and progress of the sore in chancre; if it shows a strong tendency to spread, and gets very foul under the use of medicine, then

it is a complaint highly alarming.

On the appearance of the chancre, the first step should be to destroy it by the application of lunar

caustic ( fixed in the end of a quill), which shou .

be applied to all the diseased surface, and earned even somewhat beyond it. This application is to be renewed as soon as the diseased slough begins to separate, till the surface below appears healthy and free from disease; but this practice app ies on y where the chancre is discovered early, or in Urn first twenty-four hours after its appearance : when .t exceeds that time, there is always danger of pa. o the matter being conveyed from the sore into the body, and it will be necessary to use internal medicines, to guard against any future efiocts ,( may produce. The following form of internal medi-cine should therefore be begun :



Take of Calomel, prepared, one drachm.

Crude Opium, half a drachm.

Conserve of Ilips, a quantity sufficient to form a mass,

which is to he divided into sixty pills, one of which is to he taken night and morning*. Where medicine, in the form of pills, is disliked, it may be taken with equal advantage in the form of drops : as,

l ake of Corrosive Sublimate, ten grains. Rectified Spirits of Wine, tw r o drachms.

Syrup of Saffron, one ounce.

Tincture of Antimony, one drachm.

Dissolve the mercury in the spirits of wine. Of this mixture, let from ten to twenty drops be taken in a glass of wine and water every morning. Either of these medicines is to be continued for some time after the appearance of the chancre is removed, and the infection apparently eradicated. Should both these forms of medicine disagree with the patient, from a delicate state of the stomach and bowels, then the medicine must be introduced by the skin in the form of unction ; for this purpose, let half a drachm to a drachm of common blue ointment be rubbed in every night upon the inside of the thigh, occasionally shifting the part of the skin or surface from one thigh to the other, to prevent excoriation. But w here the chancre has appeared for some time, presents a large surface, and has evidently tainted



the habit, then the application of the caustic will not destroy the disease, and other local forms will be more effectual. These forms may either consist of an ointment cr wash ; the ointment most commonly employed is the red precipitate, or calomel, which is as follows :

Take of Red Precipitate, one drachm ; or. Calomel, two drachms.

Spermaceti Cerate, half an ounce.

Let the precipitate or calomel be rubbed on a marble slab, with a small quantity of oil, till they are well blended ; then add the spermaceti ointment. With this ointment the sore is to be dressed, by spreading a little of it on a piece of lint. If the chancre is not situated on the external surface, but within the foreskiu, it may be touched with a little of the ointment by means of a hair pencil. This ointment the author has found more efficacious than most others ; and though a great variety are in use, it would only confuse a patient to insert any more. But in many cases of chancre, as ointments or oily applications disagree with the skin, the form of a wash is found a preferable application. The best wash the author has found to be a solution of caustic, as follows :

Take of Lunar Caustic, eight grains.

Rose Water,, eight ounces.

Mix them till the caustic is dissolved ; then wash the chancre with a little of it three or four times





a day. Where a mercurial wash is preferred, the corrosive solution serves very well, of the following strength :

Take of Corrosive Sublimate, twelve grains.

Lime Water, eight ounces.

Mix them together ; to be used in the same manner -as the former. In women, chancres show much the same appearance as they do in men ; but from the different structure of the parts, as women expose a greater extent of surface than men for infection, chancres in them are apt to be more numerous, and in the treatment of them it is also more difficult to apply dressings ; their cure, therefore, must be trusted more to internal medicines than external applications: and of the latter, the form of wash will suit them best. The cure of chancres in general, do not exceed from three weeks to a month ; during that time the mouth should be kept slightly affected by the internal medicines, or the gums show that red or slightly inflammatory state which marks the proper action of the remedy. It is only by absorption, or forming a chancre, that the venereal poison is introduced into the body ; which is termed its primary action : under certain circumstances, the matters of clap and pox give rise to different symptoms, which are generally described as the consequences of this primary action of the poison.

It is of the first importance to attempt to cure this stage as early as possible ; and had I my choice.



I certainly should destroy the venereal virus by friction ; hut when this cannot he submitted to, the mode directed above must be complied with, according to the particular situation of the patient : the mouth ought early to be affected, for by it you correct the virulence of the poison, aud by exciting irritation in a different part, stop the progress of inflammation round the glans penis; should the prepuce slough, bark ought to be conjoined with the mercury, and the parts kept clean by applying a linseed poultice e\ery four hours ; if during the separation of the parts hemorrhage comes on, it ought not to be prematurely stopped, for it is a salutary effort of nature to relieve herself; bark, not opium, is here to be depended upon ; and whose operation I would invariably assist by small doses of tartar emetic. There is not one effect of this disease so singularly peculiar to itself as this, and w'ben it has once appeared, we are to consider general infection as having actually taken place; for if we flatter ourselves the complaint is here merely local, and the constitution not yet contaminated, we should place too firm a reliance on hypothetical reasoning, as i will venture to affirm, in opposition to an established axiom of a celebrated teacher, that we never can distinguish with certainty, a ve nereal pimple from one which is not so ; therefore, I hold it as an invariable practice to treat such pimples as venereal ones, and in nine cases out of ten we shall be correct.



OF BUBO.

Bubo is a swelling from chancre, or a venereal sore situated on the nut, foreskin, or any way externally ; the infection, when the sore is not immediately destroyed, is conveyed through the vessels that open into it, to the hrst glands in their course, which are those of the groin ; it there occasions a painful inflammation and tumour, which begins with some degree of hardness and swelling, not larger than a kidney bean. As the swelling increases, it becomes paintul, and the person walks with difficulty : The skin over it becomes red and inflamed, rising into a tumour, with a good deal of throbbing and pulsation in it; in the course of a week or ten days, it becomes often larger than a pullet’s egg. The infection which occasions bubo, generally takes place in the first stage of a chancre, or in eight or ten days after its first appearance. The inflammation in the glands would seem, as it were, a temporary effort of the constitution to resist the farther progress of the poison. In some .cases, the infection has been known to pass into the habit, without the appearance of chancre, and the infection from chancre may also be carried into the body, without any bubo, or swelling of the groin being formed, as the whole vessels arising from the



parts of generation do not constantly pass through the glands of the groin. Bubo is very frequently produced by irritating applications to a chancre, which renders the vessels more active and more fit for absorption. The treatment of bubo, is a point that often requires much judgment: like every other glandular swelling, it either subsides without breaking the skin, or it comes to a head, and discharges a quantity of matter, by the skin of the part giving way. It has often been disputed whether it is better to make it subside without breaking the skin, or to bring it to a head, when a sore is afterwards left to be healed. This point must be left to the constitution of the patient. If the patient discovers a strong healthy habit of bodv, and the swelling shews symptoms of active inflammation, the best method is then to bring it to a head, and this will take place very quickly ; the sore that succeeds will be trifling, it will heafup in the course of a few days, and the patient is then sensible he is, in the end, to be thoroughly well,

• without any risk of the disease re-appearing at a future period : but where, on the contrary, the patient discovers a weakly constitution, and there is suspicion of some hereditary taint, as a scrofulous disposition, then the swelling should be made to subside as soon as possible, and the breaking of the skin not endangered, from the certainty that the sore would prove troublesome in the healing, and



the health of the patient might materially suffer under the long discharge that would necessarily ensue ; at the same time, it is to be observed, that in all cases of the subsiding of bubo, some small hard knots always remain, which resist the action of the remedies employed, and lengthen out also the period of the cure; besides it cannot be absolutely determined, but some lurking venereal disposition may be concealed in those hard knots, and occasion the disease to break out at some distant time. Having thus settled the mode of treatment, it is next proper to state what i? to be done, where the swelling is to be dispersed, without coming to a head. The first point, in all cases of bubo, or swelling of the groin, is to begin the use of mercury, and in order that it may be made as active as possible on the part, it should be made to pass through the seat of the disease : it should therefore be introduced by unction, in the manner formerly stated under chancre, by being rubbed every night, in the quantity of half a drachm to a drachm, upon the thigh of the affected side, and if the skin should become fretted, the rubbing from the surface should be changed to the belly, or any part of the extremity not affected. Much attention of the patient is necessary to conduct the rubbing properly ; it should be steadily and regularly persevered in, and not less than twenty minutes consumed at a time in doing it, in order that the remedy may be completely introduced



into the skin ; along with (his treatment, the subduing the symptoms of inflammation is not to be neglected ; when there is much inflammation, the application of leeches may be made ; a spare diet should be strictly adhered to, and the bowels kept regular by the use of cooling purgatives, such as were formerly recommended under the head, of clap. Rest will also form an essential part of the treatment, as every motion of the body affects the part: it is also common to apply a plaster o\er the swelling, and this maybe done so soon as some appearance of subsiding takes place ; the plaster commonly used is as follows: Take of the common mercurial plaster spread on leather, of a proportion cut somewhat larger than the size of the swelling: the skin over the swelling should be

first shaved, and rubbed with mercurial ointment, that the plaster may apply closer* and it should be cut in the edges, to make it firmly adhere. If the swelling give much pain, an opiate may be given to abate it, and the form already noticed, under the head of Swelled Testicles, will answer the purpose; in this manner, the plan of treatment is to be conducted, and the unction of the mercury continued for some time after all morbid appearances are gone, which cannot be less than five or six weeks. But when an opposite termination of the disease is wanted, or the swelling is to be brought to a head, then the proceedings must be



directed to increase instead of diminishing the inflammation of the part. For this purpose, the application of a warm poultice will be proper, which should be renewed occasionally through the day : the poultice may be made in the following manner : Take a sufficient quantity of the soft of bread, and soak it in boiling water for a few minutes, gently pressing olf the superfluous fluid ; then beat it to a pulp, and add as much linseed meal as will render the whole somewhat tenacious, it should be spread on linen cloth, about the thickness of a quarter of an inch, and a little oil spicad upon it before being applied; it is to be retained in its place by a bandage put round the waist, and another brought between the thighs, or still better by the common suspensory bandage, which may be had of all the truss-makers. The medi-ciue is to be continued in the same mauuei as where the subsiding is to take place ; but, as the mode of introducing it is oi less consequence here, it may be made as easy as possible for the patient. Instead, therefore, of the unction, the mercury may be introduced internally, eitner in the form of pill, or drop, as formerly recommended under chancre. Instead ol a spare diet enjoined above, full living will hasten the maturation of the tumour, and may therefore be indulged in. Opiates will also be necessary, where the state of pain requires it, aud the form already



$2

described;* will answer every purpose. When the swelling is come to a head, the next point is, whether it must be allowed to break of itself, or be opened by an operation. It certainly is most advisable to break of itself; for, when that takes place, a patient may be satisfied the parts within are in a more favourable state for healing afterwards, than where the skin is divided for the discharge of the matter, before the process is fullv completed. The skin being thus allowed to break, the matter will flow', and the poultice should be continued for a day or more after this event happens, till the whole comes away. When this is done, the treatment of the sore is the next object: if the mercury has had sufficient influence on the habit during the time the swelling was coming forward, the sore will heal kindly, and any common dressing will answer, such as a little Turner's cerate, or white ointment; but where the swelling has broken before the mercury has been long enough continued to destroy the venereal disposi. tion, then it must be persevered in, and the dressings of the sore must be of the same kind as for merly given under the head of Chancre. When the sore is once healed, it will be necessary to strengthen the habit by the use of bark and steel ; the form of which will be seen under the Consequences of Chancre.



I

CONSEQUENCES OF BUBO.

The preceding is the regular progress of bubo, where the habit of the patient is good, and the swelling possesses an active venereal disposition, yet the case is very different when the same disease occurs in a weakly constitution, and where it is combined with other latent maladies; thus the sore in bubo, instead of healing kindly, on the contrary, enlarges much, is attended with great pain, becomes thickened in its edges, and discharges a thin ill smelling matter. Such sores have been known to spread over the whole of the underbelly, and even to eat into its cavity, and end in the death of the patient. In this case, the leading step in the treatment, is to leave off the use of mercury, and to attend only to the constitutional disease ; ,in many instances by merely doing this, and removing the patient into the country, with the use of a milk diet, the sores have healed up ; but as this cannot always be depended upon, the application of caustic to the sore has often suspended its progress, while, by giving Opium and other sedatives internally, the sore has come to heal up. No certain plan can be laid down in such situations, and the patient must not here trust to himself.





HERNIA HUMORALIS.

SWELLED TESTICLE

Is clearly an inflammatory affection, arising from

ji

sympathetic irritation, and the most frequent source of it is gonorrhoea ; therefore, is to be treated as a highly inflammatory affection. It is a symptom apt to come on during the first stage of clap, when the inflammation runs high, and where violent purgatives, as sometimes happens, have been imprudently used. It begins with a sharp pain and stiffness of the cord, which enlarges, and, along with the testicles, gradually increases to a considerable size. It is attended with acute fever, and there is felt a particular uneasiness over the thighs and belly: when it terminates, the running of the clap, which is generally suspended during its progress, returns in increased quantity. To remove this symptom, as depending upon inflammation, the first step is to draw blood from the arm, and to cover the testicles with an emollient poultice, as follows :

Take of Elder flowers, or green leaves, a small handful,

Marshmallow leaves. Camomile, and ~S\ ormwood, the same quantity ;

which are to be boiled together, in two quarts of water, for ten minutes or a quarter of an hour. The water is then to be strained off, and used re-

\



peatedly as a fomentation during the day, while a poultice made of the boiled materials, mi.xed up with crumbs of bread, and the addition of a little sweet oil, be applied at night. Along’ with these, much attention is to be paid to support the part ; for which a horizontal posture, with rest, are to be strictly enjoined. When there is much pain, an opiate will be proper, which may be given in the following form, and repeated according to circumstances :

Take of purified Opium, a quarter of a grain, Tartar Emetic, one grain.

To be formed into a pill, with conserve of hips, and taken for a dose. In this complaint, the bowels are to be kept open by the following electuary :

Take of Lenitive Electuary, four ounces.

Cream of Tartar, two ounces.

Powdered Rhubarb, two drachms.

Nitre, half an ounce ;

Rub these together, and add as much of simple syrup as is sufficient to make them into an electuary. Of this, two tea spoonfuls may be taken in a morning for a dose, or a larger quantity, if necessary. By this treatment the swelling will soon abate, and the testicles be reduced to their natural size ; but, should some stiffness and hardness remain, mercurial unctiou may then be had recourse to, and a hemlock poultice applied to the



part, which may be made by boiling a handful of the leaves of the fresh plant, in a pint of water, for five minutes, and thickening the strained liquor with bread or oatmeal, with a little linseed meal. Leeches in no stage of this disease appear proper to me; to scarify the part when a topical remedy is indicated, will answer far better than ten thousand leeches ; the bleeding ought to be kept up by flannels dipped in warm water: the quantity taken should be considerable, whether by scarification or from the arm, as our object is to diminish the fulness of the vessels, and lessen their general action : and when the patient cannot bear a great loss of blood, the following draught will assist us:

Take Emetic Tartar four grains.

Cinnamon Water, three ounces.

A table-spoonful of this to be taken every quarter of an hour till it operate. By pursuing this course the disease usually subsides, and the parts return to their natural state.

Mr. Lawrence has lately traced a peculiar affection of the testicle, which I shall here give you in his own words :

“The patient in this affection has generally assigned some blow or other injury as the cause of the complaint ; in other instances it has originated in the hernia humoralis from gonorrhoea, and sometimes has appeared spontaneously. A painful swelling of the gland, particularly characterized by its hard-



ness, is the first appearance of the disease. After a certain length of time, the scrotum growing gradually thinner, ulcerates, but the opening which is thus formed, instead of discharging matter, gives issue to a firm and generally insensible fungus. The surround in 2: integuments and cellular substance are thickened and indurated by the complaint, so that there appears to be altogether a considerable mass of disease. The pain abates, and the swelling subsides considerably when the scrotum has given way. Tn this state the disorder appears very indolent, but if the fungus be destroyed by any means, the integuments come together and a cicatrix ensues, which is inseparably connected with the testicle.

“An examination of the part while the fungusstill remains, discloses to us the fact, that this growth has its origin in the glandular substance of the testes itself, that the coats of the part are destroyed to a certain extent, and that a protrusion of the tubuli seminiferi takes place, through the aperture thus formed. I have often ascertained the continuity of the excrescences with the pulpy substance of the testes, of which we shall find more or less remaining, according to tlje dilference of the period of the disorder. It appears that the glandular part of the testes experiences an inflammatory affection in the, first instance, in consequence of the violence inflicted on it, and that the confinement of the swollen substance by the dense and unyielding tunica



albuginea, sufficiently explains the peculiar hardness of the tumour, and the pain which is always attendant on this stage of the disorder. The absorption of the coats of the testes and of the scrotum, obviates the tension of the parts, and thereby restores ease to the patient, and at the same time that the fungus makes its appearance externally.

“ It is not improbable that if the complaint were left entirely to itself, the swelling would subside, the fungus shrink, and a complete cure ensue, w ithout any professional assistance ; but the disorder is so indolent in this stage, that a spontaneous cure would not be effected until after a very long time. The excrescence may, however, be removed by the knife, or if the nature of its attachment permit, by ligature, or it may be freely treated with escbarotic applications. The removal of the protuberance to a level with the scrotum, by means of the knife, is the shortest and most effectual mode of treatment. There can be no ground whatever for proposing castration in this malady, since in no part of its progress, nor in any of its possible consequences or effects, can it expose the patient to the slightest risk. Some may be disposed to defend tlie removal of the part, because it would bring the case to a more speedy termination, and if a patient, after beins: informed of all the circumstances, should de-*ire the operation, on this ground the surgeon would be justified in performing it. But he never



could be warranted in proposing so painful and dangerous a remedy as castration, for a disorder attended with neither pain nor damage, and admitting of cure by a perfectly safe and mild kind of treatment.

“ Funguses of a different character and progress may no doubt occur in the testes, but the description already given will serve to discriminate that particular species, to which alone the present observations are designed to apply. In a case in which the operation of castration was performed, the testes itself was sound, and the fuugus, which was a firm and dense substance, grew from the tunica albuginea.”

WASTING OF THE TESTICLES

Is sometimes a consequence of a venereal cause ; but this circumstance only occurs in some rare cases. In consequence of pox or clap, the testicles have been known to waste, though this cuv cumstance oftener arises from a spontaneous decay, than such diseases. It is apt to happen in delicate relaxed habits, with a wan sallow complexion. It does not come on till after the age of forty; it first begins in one testicle, which gradually lessens without pain, and it proceeds till nothing is left but the membrane of the part ; the decay of the other testicle then begins, and if



undergoes the same process. It does not appear to lessen at all the venereal powers of the person. No cure has yet been discovered for this complaint, though a blister has been once known to suspend its progress.

GLEET.

Various have been the opinions respecting Gleet, the ancients termed all emissions from the urethra gonorrhoeas, whether they proceeded from seminal, mucous, or purulent matter : but the moderns have distinguished it into two species, the malignant and simple. Of the malignant w r e have treated; that of the simple comes under the present head ; which is an affection of the parts of generation, accompanied by a mucous discharge, occasioned by a continuance of the discharge, after all the symptoms of gonorrhoea are gone : these symptoms arise from atony of the parts, from ulceration, inflamed glands, &c. but where gonorrhoea ends and gleet begins, I must confess I cannot precisely point out; vet I think we shall not materially err, if we consider gleet to commence when all inflammatory symptoms have ceased; gleet is a term so apparently simple, that its progress es rarely regarded by those who labour under it; and medical practitioners have considered it of so benign a nature, as to attach little importance to it; and the mode adopted for its cure often



leaves a worse disease than that it was intended to remove. For my part, I always undertake these cases with considerable anxiety, and would sooner have the cure of the disease, under any other form ; and experience proves the disease has frequently taken a course beyond the power of medicine to assist or stop; for this incipient stage may lay the foundation of very serious evil. The existence of gleet may be detected by a minute examination of the discharge ; the matter discharged by the urethra durino- the tirst stage of gonorrhoea, has the distinct character of pus; during its progress, the inflammatory action ceases, and the parts gradually assume their healthy functions ; but when it resists this salutary action of nature, whatever may be its cause, the discharge does not abate, but changes the pus into a thin watery fluid, whitish and opaque. In this stage, and as it advances more to the cbaiac-ter of gleet, it becomes transparent, mucous, and glairy, till at length it actually assumes that decided character we call gleet, by the discharge becoming more viscid and clammy ; and the decided character that gleet here takes, points out in the most forcible manner, the distinction that virtually exists between gleet and seminal weakness ; and unless this distinction is minutely attended to, much error and confusion'will arise. I am therefore anxious under this head to mark the distinction in unequivocating terms; and as I neither aspire to singularity, or to



a superior line of practice from other practitioners, to whose merit I shall feel always happy to contribute, I shall endeavour to place this intricate subject in as clear a light as fact and analogy allow me to go. I he stage we distinguish by the term malignant gonorrhoea, can alone arise from venereal excitement; gleet owes its existence to a morbid state of the urethra; while seminal weakness rises, either from general debility, excess iu veuerv, or a practice we cannot hold, in a moral point of view, in too much detestation. Hence it is, that I contend we should always look to the proximate cause, as from the nature of this disease, each stage requires a distinct practice; and by attention to the nature of the discharge, this point will be fairly elucidated. In all seminal gleet I have invariably found these peculiar symptoms, and which to me appear clearly to draw the line of distinction between them. A. seminal gleet is invariably attended by a weakness of the whole body, a loss of appetite, a heavy pain round the region of the bladder and the loins; the semen comes awav insensibly, a coughing, going to stool, slightest irritation of the penis, whose erection, though constant, is feeble, and ejects the semen easily, but without the force requisite for its expulsion in health; and this discharge is of a humid, thin, and bluish cast, slightly staining the linen. Having stated these points, I shall now proceed to the treatment of this tedious disease.



Hunter says, rf these diseases may be considered only as an inconvenience entailed on those who have had venereal gonorrhoea : no certain cure for them is known ; they are similar to the fluor albus in women.” This is language I can by no means concord with ; I think we ought in these cases to attempt at least to palliate', and I will affirm, that if the patient will vigorously assist us, we may yet do a great deal to his future happiness. The bowels ought to be kept open ; the exercise moderate; nourishing diet; three or four glasses of wine each day; rising early; bathing, and, in short, the whole tonic system. • Local means are alone applicable in its first stage, while its latter require local and constitutional ones. Hence both stages admit of the use of the bougie, and from which alone very frequently the cure is accomplished, in the stage you would apply local means, w'here stricture is the cause: Hunter says,

a blister applied on the perineum will entirely remove the remaining symptoms.” I believe stricture only to be an occasional cause of gleet; and which I think is frequently induced by the abuse of injections, for patients in the use of injections invariably fall into error ; for not content by using the quantity directed, they frequently have the astringent quality increased, without considering the consequence such an increase may give rise to ; or, on the other hand, use the injection too seldom, or too weak ; this, I grant, is on the best side of the



error : and am well convinced that was a decided practice adopted on the first commencement of those diseases we term chronic, much misery would be avoided, and many valuable lives saved. It is a want of that decisive action that lays the foundation of many of these direful complaints. I do not mean to say these diseases would not arise, for peculiar constitutions have a disposition to disease, they only require an exciting 1 cause to produce those obstinate diseases that have become the opprobrium of medicine. I only mean to maintain that this inaction too frequently accelerates their approach; and in the advance of that doctrine I am supported by fact and analogy. With every morbid affection of the organs of generation srleet combines itself, whether it arises from calculi, spasm, or atony of the bladder, urethra, kidnies, enlargement or induration of the prostate gland, the peculiar construction of which favours the generation of calculi, thickening of the coats of these organs and their canals, wasting, induration and swelling of testicles; in short, with various kinds of hernias, strictures, and obstructions of the urethra, or the other urinary canals; paralysis, general or partial, affecting one or more of these organs ; every one of these causes, separate or combined, may produce gleet : this shows the necessity of an early attention to these complaints, by which much misery and pain may be avoided. It is bv a.



complete inquiry into the phenomena of the disease we are to gain our knowledge of the part diseased, and as we advance to the elementary fibre affected, we, with tolerable precision, bring our line of action to bear on the deranged point.

OBSTRUCT IONS OF THE URINARY PASSAGES.

Diseases of the prostate gland, and other affections of the urethra, I have ever considered very formidable diseases, and the melancholy cases I daily meet with, convince me that they are really productive of more acute misery, than any other disease to which the human frame is liable. Diseases of the prostate gland very frequently arise from mal-treatment; hence the best mle of action a patient can follow, when this disease becomes his inmate, is to apply to a regular practitioner, to whom, with confidence, he may speak : many I know are deterred from applying to their family’s medical friend, for fear of being betrayed ; but, believe me, this is a childish fear, and may be productive of the worst of consequences; no medical man will divulge Ins patient’s case, where secrecy is requisite; for that would be a positive injury to himself: in-

dependent of these considerations, he will treat him with an humanity, unknown or not recognized by the daring empiric; for he will not



(rifle, merely on a presumption that delay can create no danger. I know a suspicion of this kind is frequently entertained by patients; a suspicion that drives many to the empiric, who promises every thing, but performs nothing: this suspicion is as unfounded as the rest, and in a great measure, seconded by the nefarious practices of unprincipled drug venders, who, by the shameful adulteration of drugs, disappoint the hopes of the patient and practitioner, and thus contribute to diminish the confidence of the public; for the patient, tired of a tedious cure, flies to these empirics, who increase liis disorder, and his expences; nor are patients themselves exempt from blame ; for we too frequently find they desert one practitioner for another, and the last practitioner sometimes earns the laurels of the other; but more frequently the patient is made to suffer for his caprice ; little advantage is acquired in a captious change; but uo rule being without an exception, I cannot lay down a general plan; all I wish to impress on the mind of the patient is, that an unnecessary change of a medical attendant, is never to be recommended, and more particularly so, when labouring under this disease; for the generality of practitioners, essentially vary in their mode of practice, and the captious patient often has to lament, at the expence of his general health, the change; and another inducement patients have for deserting



the regular practitioner, is—llie cheap rate drugs are retailed at at many shops; these shops, it is true, may retail them at a cheaper rate; but the question that arises here, is, whether the drugs are genuine? for it is a notorious fact, that these retailers of cheap drugs can sell their powders, &c. &c. for half the mice the substances can be obtained in

A

the drug market! The consideration of this disease leads me to that of

STRICTURE.

It is astonishing that a disease, so frequent among us, should have been so little understood; it appears as if interested motives had influenced the professors of a liberal science, to obscure and perplex the practice in this department as much as possible. As an enemy to all mystery, I shall endeavour to elucidate the different points at issue in as clear a light as possible, and leave the decisiou to the liberal mind.

This disease obstructs the free passage of the urine, and causes it either to come in a small forked, twisted stream, or drop by drop, with considerable pain; if the urethral canal is not much lessened by the stricture, it may exist many years without anv great degree of inconvenience; but though this may be the case respecting the urine, I am led to conceive, that the semen in the act of coition may not properly be directed into the vagina; of



course attention to this stage of the disease becomes requisite; and more particularly in the ad sauced period of life, as the expelling powers for e\acu-ating the urine, and ejecting the semen become weaker.

In all obstructions of the urethra, a long continued course of mercury appears the most probable chance of giving relief; a plentiful use oi mucilaginous drinks being also given; the utility of hemlock in these cases, some practitioners have doubted; but in combination with opium and mercury, great advantage may be derived. I usually give it in the following manner :

Take of Calomel, ten grains.

Extract of Hemlock, one scruple.

Purified Opium, six grains, to be divided into twenty pills: one to be taken morning and evening. The use of the medicated bougie, in cases of urethral strictures, cauuol be dispensed with.

Diseases of the perineum and anus, will frequently yield to the application of a bougie, when every other mode of action lias failed. Suppression of urine, partial or total, is a disease requiring early attention, whether it arises from a temporary spasm, or is caused by an enlarged, or indurated prostate gland, contractions of the passage, tubercles, callous ulcers, or from old cicatrix, is here of little consequence, for the treatment of the one is



correspondent to the treatment of the other. If suppression of urine arises from a natural stricture, I then consider the disease inherent in the constitution, and which the application of a bougie can only remove, for incurable would have been this disease, but for this invention. I am sorry to add, that numbers of persons have unhappily lost their lives from being reduced to the above situation, and this partly from not knowing* the good effect of bougies ; and it is well known that before their use, gleets were deemed incurable, but I have rarely found a gleet so obstinate as to resist their efficacy. When the urethra is effected by stricture, the urine comes in small quantities, is scattered and forked, and with it a small quantity of matter ; the desire of making water increases, and perhaps with considerable pain, a few drops come ; on pressure, a degree of pain is felt, most commonly on the part where the stricture is situated, but to clearly ascertain whether a stricture really exists, is by the introduction of a bougie. „

Take a bougie of a middle size, bent in the form of the catheter, smeared with oil; let the patient, either in a standing posture or lying on his back with his knees bent, (this is by far the best position) gradually introduce it into the urethra; should it meet with resistance from the stricture, he should endeavour slowly and gently

E



bO

to push it on, without having occasion for a second introduction'; this is to he done by twirling it between the thumb and finger, without using any force; should blood appear, he must desist; when once passed, it should be left for two or three hours or move, unless the irritation is great when it should be immediately withdrawn, and, at all events, on its first introduction never kept ahove half an hour, or till it gives pain; thus by degrees each time continued longer; to prevent its insinuating itself into the bladder, the of end the bougie may be secured from that accident, always dangerous, by dipping the end in melted sealing-wax, till it is of a size sufficient to secure it; when a linen bag, in the form of a glove-stall, maybe applied over the penis, to prevent its slipping out. jf a patient can submit to wear it nine or ten hours in a day, he will, in all probability, be much sooner relieved, and if it docs not stimulate too much by a constant application, it is certainly a prudent step to wear it night and day without intermission; but if that is not done, the patient had better only use it in the day-time. Patients labouring under these diseases have reason to dread a return of them, but this in most cases may be prevented by having a supply of bougies in their possession. The proper time to apply bougies is an hour or two before the usual time of rising m the morning. The use of the bougie, when once



begun, should be persevered in for some time, nor should a failure in passing it at first deter the patient from persisting in the attempt; it may not be unnecessary to observe, that while an affection of the urethra continues, intemperance and high living must be avoided ; for when the corpus spongiosum urethrae is distended, the bougie will not operate so kindly. What renders these complaints so difficult of cure is, persons neglecting to apply in time; looking on its first commencement as proceeding from the stone or gravel, they content themselves with those remedies applicable to such cases, till at length, from excessive drinking, a long journey, or some similar cause, the obstacles are so far increased, as to bring on nearly a total suppression of urine ; the disorder is all this time permitted to gain ground, and the cure becomes more difficult ; whereas by an early application to some regular practitioner, the nature of the complaint would have before been discovered, and a proper mode of cure directed. It is now acknowledged that suppurative bougies answer every intention of cure in the diseases I speak of; and in proportion as the strictures are removed, the urine^ows freelj through the urethra, the callosities soften, and the fistulous openings show a good disposition to heal; mere dilatation in urethral strictures, will neither relieve the patient, nor promote the views of the surgeon ; a medicative power we must seek

e 2



for, capable of acting on Hie urethral membranes and mucal glands, so as to produce a good discharge. A question here naturally arises, do metallic bougies possess a medicative power ? no, they merely act by dilatation and abstraction, and I am led to conceive that passing and repassing over so delicate and irritable a surface as the inside of the urethra unquestionably is, a great disadvantage may arise from their application ; did metallic bougies possess galvanic power, what greater advantage would that principle give them over the plaster bougie, I confess myself ignorant of: an union of pewter, bismuth, and tin, are, in my opinion, of no real merit, as far as regards the removal of urethral strictures, arising from a venereal action.

The great error in the treatment of stricture appears to me to arise from supposing all strictures permanent, and which, I am convinced, is very rare ; while preternatural irritability occasioning spasm, is not an uncommon cause of stricture. ^ hen I speak of temporary stricture, I mean the whole urethra is^fected by one spasm; and, I believe, the use of caustic has induced a permanent stricture, where only a temporary stricture first existed. Spasm is a common disease of every part of the urethra, and which the precipitate use of any bougie may induce to an uncommon degree; nor is the



disposition to spasm greater in one part than the other. Gonorrhoea, by producing a high state of irritation, maybe productive of it; want of patience in the introduction of the bougie, in such cases, may be the ground of very serious injury; and, 1 believe, rash treatment has been the cause of more permanent strictures than any disposition in those parts. I am well convinced bougies are frequently employed when no necessity exists for their introduction, and that spasm is the consequence; which induces a belief of the existence of real stricture, although the urine has been accustomed to pass freely ; and, I certainly think, that if the urine flows in a fair, moderate stream, no surgical assistance is required ; and when it is required, the cure must not be left solely to its operation, the bougie may remove preternatural contraction, but not the cause of the disease. This will require camphor, opium, aether, and mercury, where venereal excitement is the predisposing cause. There is also another very material error in the treatment of these diseases : if different constitutions, labouring under the same disease, require different forms of medicine, I think we should accelerate the cure of urethral complaint by varying the composition of the bougie, as circumstances indicated: it is this want of variation that renders these cases tedious and incomplete. My principal view in this depart-



merit is to recommend'to those afflicted with stricture, and generally those affections of the bladder and urethra, which are the consequence of ill-treated cases of clap, a bougie, where necessary, that shall combine in itself a mild and efficacious remedy, as far as depends upon local means. On the composition and qualities of bougies, the chief circumstances that are to be dreaded, and which prove too often fatal, are the morbid effects of it, which attack the passage of the urethra, and impede the discharge of urine. Many have been induced to believe, that in consequence of mattter or pus covering the end of the bougie, when withdrawn, that the whole urethra was ulcerated ; which has no foundation in fact, being merely the effect of a stimulus applied to so delicate a membrane. A medical gentleman, with wonderful sagacity, has found the abstraction of this matter to be necessary to the cure of the Tabes Dorsalis, &c. &c. The foundation of the most serious evil is laid from this source, for the bladder becomes harassed and worn out by the unavoidable and fruitless attempts to void the urine: disease of course attacks its internal structure; its power as a circular muscle, acting by its own irritability, becomes weakened, is often entirely lost, and the unhappy patient hardly enjoys an hour ot ease or tranquillity, from the very distressing sen-



sations connected with this state. To remove these, local, and constitutional means are both requsit'e, and the bougie forms a prominent character in their cure; hut hitherto the nature of the bougie has been little understood, and its application accordingly made in an improper manner : the question is, whether this useful instrument should act entirely on mechanical principles, or should combine with this, a sanative operation ? If we examine the natural structure of the parts to which it is applied, we find them endued with an exquisite sensibility, and in case of stricture this sensibility is increased to a morbid, and often painful degree, not unfre-quently accompanied with actual inflammation. The introduction, then, of any mechanical substance into a part in this state, cannot fail to promote preternatural irritation, and to heighten every painful . symptom which attends the disease nor is this all that is necessary to effect a cure. The bougie, even if it acts mechanically, it is only necessary it should do so on that part where the stricture or obstruction is situated: the bougie ought invariably to be

introduced in the form of the catheter, otherwise a rupture of the canal of the urethra will take place. A small bougie ought never to be passed, when the urethra will admit a larger. The first idea of the bougie seems to have been wrong, as the means of applying medicine to the obstructed



part: and corresponding to this idea, the instrument was generally smeared with irritating or caustic applications for this purpose, on the [trine i-ple of destroying it. The attention Mr. Daran paid to this department, brought the bougie into greater perfection, and the use of it into general practice. His improvement consisted in introducing into it ingredients of an irritating nature, but so blended as to be less active than the others of his dav: he

T ' . ( J

likewise gave it a smoothness and a firmness of surface, to which hitherto little attention had been paid. But in the composition of the bougie Mr. Daran proceeded on a false supposition : he conceived suppuration, or discharge of matter from the urethra, was necessary to the cure of stricture; and the business of the destruction of this morbid enlargement took place by the suppurative process alone. There is little doubt that the success of his means depended much on the mechanical action of the instrument on the morbid part; and that the irritation that it produced elsewhere, so far from being serviceable, was exciting unnecessary uneasiness, weakening the constitution by a profuse discharge, and in other respects operating prejudicially to the patient. But so much did he conceive his cures as connected with the medicated qualities of his instrument, that he concealed its composition. But though Daran made a wrong application of the medicated quali-



ties of bis bougie., still I mean not to infer that (he medicated quality is not one of the most essential requisites to the cure. In making these bougies, attention should be paid to all the requisites in point of shape and form. Certain it is, that to Daran we owe the formation of a bougie, founded on regular and scientific principles. In the use of the bougie, we ought to consider what is our object in its application: do we want to allay spasm, or remove obstruction ? because these circumstances require a variation in the composition; and this want of variation, I am led to conceive, renders the cure tedious and incomplete ; in the first we want a bougie to assist our internal medicine, in abating the spasm, while in the latter we want a bougie that will promote the general circulation, dispose the parts to a salutary, inflammatory action, and the formation of good pus, with a disposition to heal. The bougies that would be proper to these stages again answers not our intention in gleets of long duration, where an anodyne quality appears necessary. The strongest objections to the caustic bougie, I conceive to be in the rapidity of its action, and the uncertainty of its application : for by exposing the membranes of the cells of the penis, to such a violent and extended process of sloughing, as not only to threaten, by a frequent repetition, arterial hemorrhage, but total destruction to the



circular lining of the urethra; hence it is the frequent application I condemn more than its use, for the abuse arises rather from that source, than in the caustic itself. I conceive all haemorrhage detrimental to our object in these cases; and when produced invariably retards it: again the superiority of the common bougie over the armed is marked ; for we generally can introduce the common bougie without haemorrhage, while the armed usually produces it; but I never saw overflowing chamber-pots of blood from its use, though the urethra will admit very frequently of a force, we could not suppose it capable of bearing ; yet I conceive that no apology for its application—for by the exercise of our patience, we shall procure the dilatation; force may overcome, but cannot ultimately relieve ; experience alone will decide the necessary quantum we want. What is to be acquired by force, hemorrhage, laceration, inflammation, spasm, and increased excitement. Two causes, hitherto claiming little attention, very materially retard the introduction of the bougie, by increasing the local irritation': costiveness has a peculiar tendency to this, and which ought always to be avoided, when you mean to have the instrument passed ; the making water a few minutes before its introduction, increases the spasm, and of course retards its passing: these causes lead me



to suppose that the resistance arising from them,

• has been mistaken for strictures, particularly where the spasm has been so great as to leave an indentation ; and this indentation, unfortunately for suffering' humanity, has left no doubt on the mmd of the practitioner, ot the actual existence o( permanent stricture : apply caustic to such a state of the urethra, its effects are too obvious to require comment.

As we are on practical observations, I shall mention how far the patient ought to pass the bougie, which ought never to be but just beyond the strictures, and the patient’s feelings will be bis best criterion to judge when he has passed them; por should the bougie, even by the surgeon, be passed often into the bladder, for when we have ascertained the nature of the case, what have we to do with the bladder by local application ? Sharp, an author of considerable experience, and whose judgment demands accurate attention, says, “ it is yery remarkable in regard to many of these strictures, that the symptoms arising from them shall be extenuated by acting against the stricture, that is to say, by introducing a bougie big enough to distend the urethra, the pain of the stricture shall cease, and the stranguary abate ; so that a man accustomed to make water every hour, shall, by wearing a bougie, retain it three or four hours.”

The seat of stricture is generally found at two.



three, tour, five, or six inches, from the external orifice, but more frequent between the second and fifth inch, and sometimes at the neck of the bladder ; and which occasions a similar sensation to stone, or inflammation there, and has induced a belief of the existence of stone. In order to distinguish diseases of the bladder from calculi, we have onlv to attend to the sensation the urine produces on its evacuation. If it proceeds from the formation of stone, the pain w ill be felt w ith the first drop of water; if of no magnitude, or when in the neck of the bladder, and with the last drop where the stone is large; while every other disease that affects this organ produces a continued pain, during the evacuation of the discharge of water : and w hich sensation remains a second or more after the discharge of urine. So gradual is the disposition to stricture in some patients, that they labour under its influence without any knowledge of its existence, till some accident or disease has discovered it. If practitioners are undecided respecting the mode of treating those diseases, they are not less so respecting its origin ; and perhaps no medical subject will admit of a greater variety of hypotheses than this, equally plausible. Among the variety, the following are the most general causes: predisposition in the

parts, venereal excitement, enlargement of the prostate gland, a long continued spasm, gonorrhcea, gleet; the frequent application of the caustic



bfugie, astringent injections, gravel, piles, stone, &c. &c.

The different states, stages, and origin of stricture would form an interesting work, as then we might come to a certain rule of action. For my part, I am well convinced, where general debility exists, no bougie will alone effect a cure: by internal medicine we must assist its operation, and as less fatality attends the use of the common bougie, I think it ought always to be preferred to the caustic; but neither are admissible till external and internal remedies have been tried.

Suppression of urine, as connected with this state of the disease, arises more from inflammation or spasm, than actual obstruction ; the means adopted for relief must be by bleeding, glvster, and a cooling diet, with a liberal use of opium ; immerging the feet into cold water has frequently relieved the spasm; but where connected with much inflammation, the warm bath is most to be. relied upon.

As a consequence of stricture, it belongs to this department to treat upon fistula perina?o, which may arise either from an abscess originally formed in this part, or from a portion of the urine retained in the bulb of the urethra, in consequence of stricture; in both there is a breach of the urethra, and the event is frequently similar: for the urine so detained forms sinuses, which open by various



orifices in the pcrinaeum, and even extend to the scrotum. The bougie will here be of infinite service assisted by warm vinegar, and. the strong mercurial ointment well rubbed on the part, v. ith a decoction of the sarsaparilla, and, of course, with these means, a cooling antiphlogistic regimen: and if the bougie can be introduced into the bladder, the cure with the above mode may be depended upon, and supersede the necessity of the knife.

VENEREAL ERUPTIONS

Show themselves like spots of a reddish, brownish, or copper colour; they generally appear first on the forehead or breast. More rarely, they have been known to attack the palms of the hands, and in such cases to be very numerous. Their general appearance is that of spots about the size of spangles, of a copper colour, not raised above the skin; their surface, some time after their appearance, is rough, and falls oft in the form of white scales, leaving’ a slight pit behind. This is repeated, till the pit loses its covering, degenerates into an ulcer, which discharges a thin matter mixed with blood, and at other times throws out ragged warty excrescences. Yv ith this appearance, the skin has been often known to be completely covered; and in the language of some writers, has been compared to a piece of dirty



copper. The treatment of venereal eruptions requires the same use of mercury as directed for the symptom of sore throat. But here it will be more useful to introduce the medicine inwardly, from the diseased state of the skin, which will not so readily bear the friction, and also to join with the mercury some antimonial medicine, which may occasion it to act more powerfully upon the skin. This plan will also be assisted by some decoction, or diet drink of a sweating nature, which will tend greatly to hasten the cure. The following forms of medicine will best answer for these purposes :

Take of Calcined Mercury, of Opium and Camphor, each one drachm.

Of Tartar Emetic, one scruple.

Simple Syrup, as much as will make a mass.

To be formed into sixty pills : one to be taken every night, or, in place of this form :

Take of the Compound Calomel, or Plummer’s Pill, one drachm, formed into twelve pills ; one to be taken every night and morning.

Diet Drink .

Take of Mezereon, two drachms.

Shavings of the Guaiacum Wood, two ounces. Liquorice Root, one ounce and a half.

Let them be boiled in two pints of water, till re-



ducedto a pint'and a half; then strain it, and let a cupful be drank frequently in the day, so as to use a pint in twenty-four hours ; or.

Take of Sarsaparilla Root, sliced, three drachms, Mezereon, ditto, one drachm.

To be boiled in five pints of water till reduced to two, and to be used in the same manner as the former.

IMAGINARY VENEREAL COMPLAINTS.

/

It is the misfortune of some patients who have laboured under this malady to conceive such a dreadful idea of the obstinacy of its nature, that they remain for life the unhappy victims of their own fears, and suppose that the disease remains still in their constitution. The evidence of this they draw from every pimple, blotch, or change of the skin, that shows itself at any period afterwards, regarding it as a relic of the former complaint. Such patients it is impossible to undeceive, and they become the prey of every advertising quack, who soon, by his medicine, creates some formidable disease, where none existed, and which finally ends in the ruin of the patient's health, and not unfrequently terminates in his death. The state of the mouth and the tongue furnishes also grounds for the same suspicion. Thus, it is common, after a mercurial course, for some rawness.



soreness, and even ulceration, to remain for a

/

considerable time, and if mercury is bad recourse to by the patient, these symptoms will rapidly increase. Among other ideas equally absurd, is, that if mercury is once taken for the cure of the lues, it will not effectually do so again. The safest plan is for a patient, under these suspicions, to put himself on a course of diet-drink already mentioned ; and if the symptoms disappear, which they readily will, this will best convince him of his erroneous opinion.

DISEASES RESEMBLING SYPHILIS.

Diseases that resemble syphilis no doubt arise, but the character they assume may belong to any disease; the conclusions drawn on this head are rather contradictory than corroborative; the disease itself exhibits nothing but contradiction. The danger of exhibiting mercury in such doubtful cases, ought to be impressed on every mind ; but I must confess, I feel equally satisfied of the greater danger which would inevitably attend the neglect of a real venereal complaint, on a supposition it did not arise from that source. That every ulcer which bears the marks of syphilis is not venereal, is a fact well elucidated by the accurate W iseman, who, with a candour that does honour to his memory, gave

9



his unsuccessful practice as well as successful; “ I would not/’says he, “ have any mail ra^h in judging all ulcers tube venereal that do resemble it; for I have seen nurses with chapped nipples, and serpiginous ulcers on the breast, and maids likewise in the same condition, who have been cured with-

i

out any respect to lues. I have seen also many infants broken out about the lips, forehead, and body, with many suspicious pustulae arid ulcers, that were born of chaste parents; but this brings us to no certain definition : in ail great commercial towns, w here, from the flux and reflux of the inhabitants, the victims of Venus are of course great ; and where the constitution is weakened and enervated by over excess, and the constant exhibition of the mineral, appearances take place arising from a venereal cause; but in consequence of the weak energy of animal machine in which they reside, do not possess the usual appearance we find connected with syphilis, to that decided extent which points out the disease more clearly in a vigorous habit on its first attack ; nor is the venereal virus so virulent in its nature, as it is on its first appearance/having in ipso facto become mere mild, but not less dangerous a poison.” Mr. Abernethy says, “ in some later cases, when the disease has been long protracted, and the patient very anxious to get rid of it, l have given a little calomel for that purpose; but not so as to invalidate the opinion that the



disease was not syphilitic. Having 1 waited, for instance, four months from the occurrence of the sore throat, with erruptions, and being satisfied, by the progress of the disorders, that they were not syphilitic, I have directed that one of the compound calomel pills should be taken every second or third night, which generally disposes the sores in the throat to heal; but I have taken care to remit the use of even this small quantity, if it seemed to heal the sores too speedily ; for it seems to me better to let the disease exhaust itself, than suddenly to cure it; as, in the latter case, it is very likely to return.” In another part of his work, Mr. Abernethy thus reasons: “ It follows as a general rule of conduct

in practice, that surgeons are not to confide in their powers of discrimination ; but in all cases of ulcers, arising from impure intercourse, to act as if the sore was venereal, to give sufficient mercury slightly to affect the constitution; to guard against the consequences of absorption, and by local and general means to cure as quickly as possible the local disease, and thus remove the source of contamination, and the necessity for the continuance of the medicine. This is, I believe, the general rule of practice adopted by the best surgeons; and it appears to me, in the present, state of our knowledge of these diseases to be judicious.” Amid this diversity of opinion, I am led to conceive, from the success I have had in it, that the best plan of treatment is,

f2

'i



to modify the action of the mercury, so that while it operates specifically in the removal of the virus, the constitution shall not suffer ; by this mode of action, where previous infection really existed, a practitioner cannot fall into gross and fundamental error; while, on the other hand, should any latent spark really remain behind, and the case treated by any other remedy, or the disease permitted to exhaust itself, the practitioner will soon be convinced he has fallen into a gross and fundamental error: the bad elFect of such a doctrine is too apparent to require any comments.

VENEREAL SORE THROAT

Is a constitutional symptom ; it begins with little or no pain; there is felt at first only a slight prickling on swallowing food ; when the throat is examined, ulceration is perceptible, and these ulcers have a particular appearance ; they are of a conical shape, often of considerable depth, and they in general attack that part of the throat termed the almonds; on each side they are covered with a foul crust of white thick matter, resembling the fat of bacon; their effects, in the end, are to produce hoarseness, stinking breath, &c. Besides the throat, every part of the mouth may occasionally be the seat of venereal ulcers, though they are most



frequent on the palate of the tongue. A deep copper-coloured spot, somewhere between the pap and middle of the palate is the first appearance ; this spot at last becomes ulcerated, and advances rapidly both in breadth and depth. It is generally single, and in this it differs fiom sores produced in the mouth by mercury, which are numerous.

TREATMENT.

The cure of the Venereal Sore Throat, is only to be accomplished by the proper administration of mercury ; but to assist its operation, and check the progress of the sore, and prevent its destroying the soft palate, it is necessary to make applications to the throat in the first instance, in the form ot gargle, of which the following will be found one ot the most successful:

Take of Muriate of Mercury, two grains.

Crude Sal Ammoniac, half a drachm.

Infusion of Roses, eight ounces.

Purified Honey, one ounce.

Mix the whole in form of a gargle, with which the throat is to be washed three or four times a day. Instead of a gargle, where the sore spreads very fast, it would be more effectual to touch it with lunar caustic. The patient placing himselt before a glass, and having a complete view of the



%

scat of the disease, with the caustic fixed in the end of a quill, it may then be applied to the sore as already directed iri Chancre, and when the slouah casts oh, it may then be dressed with the follow ing application:

Take of Qu icksilver and Honev, each one ounce. Let the mercury be killed, by rubbing it in a marble mortar; then mix with it another ounce of Honey, and one drachm of Essential Oil of Cloves; of this, a little is to be applied often every day to the sore, by means of a hair pencil.

Having thus attended to the local treatment, the constitutional course is at the same time to be regularly gone through ; and the mercury may be either introduced by the skin in unction, as directed in the cure of Bubo, or it may be sfiven in the form of the pill or drop, as detailed in the cure of Chancre ; in whatever form it is conducted, the course should not be for a shorter period than from five to ten weeks. The patient should be covered with flannel ; he should avoid cold and damp, and should be particularly attentive in his diet, to avoid whatever may affect his stomach or bowels, of an acid or unripe vegetable nature, from the irritability w hich the stomach and bowels acquire under the use of mercury, which renders them apt to be affected by the slightest imprudence. In using the mercury, the mouth should



be kept a little sore, and the pulse should be raised to nearly a hundred in a minute. r I he patient should use plenty of mucilaginous drinks; where gripes come on, they will he best relieved by a glass of warm spirits and water, with a little gin-ger; but if they come on, attended with looseness, then an opiate will be the best remedy, in the form given in a former part of this work. It salivation, or discharge of fluid from the mouth, is very profuse, then the mercury must be used in a smaller quantity, and in the mean time the discharge will be suspended with the following wash :

Take of Purified Borax, half an ounce. Disssolve it in a pint of boiling water, and add two ounces of the best Honey; w ith this the mouth is to be frequently washed in the course of the day.

Where the constitution appears to suffer much from the action of mercury during this course, and excessiye sweating ensues from its use, the medicine may be interrupted tor a little, and the bark and vitriolic acid employed in its place, in the following manner:

Take of Essential Salt of Bark, two drachms;

dissolve it in twelve ounces of water ; then

\

add of Huxham’s Tincture of Bark, two ounces; of Vitriolic Acid, two drachms. Of this mixture, two table-spoonfuls are to be taken every four hours.



Or this mixture may be used without suspending the use of mercury, and if the sweatings abate under this treatment, the cure will be more speedily completed.

But of all the uneasy symptoms which attend the use ot mercury, none is so troublesome as the soreness of the mouth ; a symptom which is necessarily connected with the recovery, and w hich every patient must learn to bear with patience. In this state, nothing gives more uneasiness than eating dry bread. Biscuit soaked in warm water, will answer best; even the palate, during this course, has its feelings so altered, that a patient loses his relish for many things which he used to find agreeable. Every thing which is hot and stimulant, should be avoided by the patient, which are the only means to lessen this tendency to inflammation, that the mouth must unavoidably take on during a mercurial course.

REGIMEN DURING A MERCURIAL COURSE.

Though some general directions have already been given on this head, it may be proper to enforce them on the mind of the patient by some further observations.

Under the use of mercury, some restraint is absolutely necessary; this remedy, it is well known



stimulates or increases the action of the system, and a person, during the first days of the course, feels himself in better spirits and health than usual; he gradually becomes more and more irritable, until the pulse quickens; thus he becomes susceptible of the slightest stimulus, and the propriety of avoiding whatever tends to increase this must be apparent; as nothing docs it sooner than exposure to cold, and stimulating articles of diet, a patient cannot be enjoined too strictly on these heads. If the patient cannot stay at home, or confine himself to an equal temperature, then he should take the advantage of additional clothing when he goes abroad, and shun exposing himself to any situation where the air may be directed in a current or stream upon him. In the diet, some regard to the natural habits of the patient must be had, but still the simpler it is, the more favourable it will be to his cure. It should consist of farinaceous matter, as gruel, or decoction of sarsaparilla, with bread, for breakfast and supper, broth and soup, w ith a small portion of animal food, will make a situable dinner. No fermenting liquors should be allowed. Weak wine and water make the best beverage. This is the fittest plan that can be pursued, and every advantage will arise to the patient for having this restraint upon himself. It is very rare in modern times that the disease is found to go farther than



what the author has described ; but where much neglect has happened, and no means of cere haie been attended to, other symptoms occur besic s those which have been specified. Thus a slight inflammation of the eyes, and dimness of sight, sometimes met with. In this case, the appearance of the eye is peculiar, a:.d readily distinguished from other inflammations, and it is only to the use of mercury it yields. Other symptoms which are observed at times, are fissures of the palins of the hands, and about the anus, and excrescences also about the latter. All these symptoms readily yield to the plan \\c have detailed. At this time of day, the appearances which marked the disease at its commencement, are unknown. Then the loss of the liair, of the teeth, and even of the eyes, are mentioned as common occurrences; we have reason therefore to infer, that the action of the poison is now of a milder nature, and that the treatment of the disease is better understood ; yxit still there are instances, where a person is baffled iu a successful issue of the cure. This arises either from the remedy being* carried too far, or from a fault in the constitution of the patient. His being* badly prepared; the form ill fitted to the disease, not having been given long enough, or in sufficient quantity : the grand object in this disease is to employ the mercury iu such quantity and such periods as to completely destroy the veneral virus. I never



depend upon any preparation of mercury, but that I obtain from the Apothecary’s Hall. The same observations apply to the ulcers in the constitutional stage of the disease. There is no exact period can be prescribed for continuing the course of mercury; it must be determined by the appearance of the cure. In certain constitutions, the moment the venereal disposition of the sore is subdued, mercury acts as a poison upon the habit. Wherever the venereal ulcers heal up to a certain point, and afterwards become painful, and increase in size, instead of going on to contract, then there is ground to suppose that the medicine has been continued too long. Instead of being persisted in, or increased in quantity, the mercury should be immediately laid aside, and bark, opium, and sarsaparilla substituted in its place, along with a milk diet, and a change to the country 7 air. This plan will rectify the faults of the mercury, restore the patient to sound health, and heal up the remains of this disease

ONANISM.

I am of opinion the treatment of this disease claims a prominent attention from the medical profession, in as much as we are to consider it the Roscius of Empiricism; and I will venture to affirm.



the cameleon never changed its colour so often as the character of this disease is reported to have assumed, from these interested men; in short, the treatment of no complaint requires more delicacy than this; it is the most insidious of all maladies ; for the victims of this disease are generally in the flower of youth, beauty, and vigour: the idea of seminal weakness is attached to every stage of it, and patients are apt to conceive themselves labouring under an actual and dangerous disease, where none virtually exists. In its first progress, it is a disease of mere simple relaxation, depending on a local rather than general debility, and can only become formidable when the mind is impressed with depressing and anxious fears, which have no existence in fact; the patient incessantly dwells upon it, and is eager to go any length to get rid of this trifling appearance ; and if the unhappy victim conceives himself, bv any acts of imprudence, to have solicited it, he is strongly affected by the remonstrance, and in the paroxysm of a recurrence, often terminates in suicide an unmanly life. Nature, outraged Nature, avenging a dereliction of her great primary law, by making existence so extremely wretched to the culprit, who has rendered himself incapable of transmitting to another existence, that he seeks, in the vigour of life, for a premature death, as an oblivion of former error. It is from the strong impression no cure can be effected, that this disease



has increased ; hence has arisen lhaf melancholy train of diseases connected with general debility ; and with this prejudice is connected the fear of not being able to perform the grand function of Nature; for, next to the necessaries connected with the preservation of the individual, the most imperious is that which is subservient to the propagation of our species ; for every one feels proudly solicitous to exhibit proofs of his manly prowess in this mysterious andmost important act of Nature. This is clearly not a disease of the parts connected with generation, but of the mind, in as much as the mind seduces itself to believe the organs are incompetent to this grand task. No doubt cases of real debility are to be found ; but where one case of real debility is found, there are a hundred imaginary ones, and these latter become formidable in proportion as the mind is affected. If towards that period of life when Nature is advancing the individual to perfect manhood, young people are confined to a sedentary life, instead of engagements that expand the limbs and fully occupy the mental faculties, a superabundant degree of irritation is produced, which expands itself on a self-created object of the imagination ; in such situations improper habits are very easily acquired ; at first by imitation, and lastly, of the consequences they may lead to ; hence the inventive powers of the imagination supply the place of natural objects. A suspension of the



equilibrium of the nervous system having taken place, a continued voluntary effort to retain certain ideas in the mind is the offspring combined with peculiar organic operations, and thus a new chain of associations between the mind and some of the corporeal actions are fixed ; and volition is gradually brought on to influence a function which, according to the dictates of Nature, ought never to be exercised, but under the direction of instinct. We seldom err when we take instinct for our guide. By this practice a constant irritation is produced into the general system, and renders the generative fibres callous to the commission of coition ; for by • the constant repetition of this action, the organs of generation are so familiarized to the dictates of the imagination, that they are more readily excited into action by this morbid and vitiated influence, than by the effect of their natural stimuli. Thus the foundation of an aversion to Paphian pleasures is laid, and nocturnal emissions follow; some slight local irritation of the parts of generation agitates the first link of that chain of ideas which has beeu artificially associated with the action of these organs ; uninterrupted by volition and undisturbed bv external impressions, the chain continues, and the organs, uninterrupted, continue to perform their functions in compliance to this unnatural excitement.

This commonly takes place towards day-break.



arising from a renewal of that general excitability which takes place during the first sleep; the interval between rendering the system more susceptible of every new impression, and the debility of a weak mind favouring the impression, repetition succeeding repetition, the above described association is further confirmed, and of course the difficulty of destroying the habit rendered more tedious and doubtful, while the power and desire of performing the natural function is, of course, proportionally impaired. The mind encroaching upon the prerogatives of the natural stimuli, the organs of generation, either from a morbid rapidity of action, or from being long accustomed to obey the dictates of the imagination on the slightest irritation, arc no longer capable of the excitement produced on a healthy subject, by the opposite sex. As a disease of the mind, the first object is to destroy the acquired association of ideas, existing between the mental and organic action, and to prevent the mind from recurrence to its former associations. Rousseau recommends to the period of youth the sports of the field, as days of fatigue will he followed by nights of repose ; and thus the superabundant irritability of the system will be relieved. Celibacy is a state evidently at variance with Nature a ; .d Society. It is a most singular circumstance, that those people who, from disgust to society, have sought solitude, have by the peculiarity of



their example and mode of life, produced a great portion of citizens, entirely devoted to solitude and celibacy: history furnishes numerous examples of this kind. The Egyptians and the Greeks in their decline considerably suffered by the effect of this example ; and in modern times we see this spirit of solitude increase among the oriental and meridional parts of Europe. I conceive it the interest of every state to deprecate this love for celibacy, as far as possible, for I believe it will require no great strength of argument to convince every state that its welfare consists in a healthy and numerous progeny, therefore it follows that no government can be too solicitous to promote marriage among its people ; hence, l contend, it becomes a carmen necessarium to inquire into the causes of impotence in males, and sterility in females, and what influence prostitution has on the general interest of a state; and whether in an age that may have been equalled, but not surpassed, in licentiousness, the effect of these causes have increased or decreased. As far as regards impotence and sterility, we may take for our established priori, syphilitic diseases as the cause; and this I am the more anxious to maintain, in order to completely destroy every germ of that dangerous and contemptible hypothesis, at present too fatally believed viz. that Masturbation renders its deluded victims unequal to the task of coition and propagation. It does not fall to the department of the



physician to aggravate the disease, by surrounding it with more horrors than it really possesses. Such a line of conduct is as futile as it is criminal, as wanton as it is unwise, and its influence over a weak mind may be more keen than death ; for what terrors has death which are so hideous as the state this disease is depicted by some to produce; the horror of such language may suit interested men; and thus the springs of life by their nostrums are goaded on, and like oil poured on the fire, it burns more forcibly only to be sooner extinguished.

It was for the purpose of extending and familiarizing useful and general knowledge, as well as to point out the folly of supposing one medicine capable of curing a multitude of diseases, all different in character and symptoms, that I was induced to engage in the two first volumes of The London Medical and Surgical Spectator: that by an exposure of the general routine of the practice of the empiric, the composition of his medicine would be known, the history of his life exposed, the foundation of his exalted fame examined, and the truth of his pretensions brought to the public bar, so that his plausibility might no longer delude by his fair promises.

It is a singular fact, when a patient is at a loss at what door to lay his complaint, here for his heavy burthen he finds a resting post; and without further inquiry or reflection he considers this p.raclice

c



as the fundamental cause of his ill health. L nprofit-able and unpleasing is the task he now sets about ; for instead of endeavouring to fortify his mind against the immoral attacks of a depraved imagination, he fondly courts them ; and as prepossession always exceeds the circle of possibility, he thinks every individual is acquainted with the nature, cause, and history of his disease; every pimple, every flush of the face alarms him: thus he fears the scorn of a world who never give themselves the trouble to think about him or his disease. Fascinated with the idea, he gives way to the practice, and at length becomes the dupe of some interested individual, who, instead of pointing out the real cause of his complaint, condemning the practice, and ridiculing his fears, generally adds to his unhappiness by a terrific, but plausible definition ; which definition requires definition, and then with a farrago of unchemical medicines, entirely deranges the salutary operation of nature, and leaves the patient in a far worse condition than he found him. I strongly reprobate a profusion of medicine ; medicine is only intended to assist the regular operations of nature, w hen her powers, under the influence of disease, are too weak to regain their healthy action ; when we attempt more, we fail.

The existence of this disease is generally indicated bv great debility, languor, listlessness, want of resolution and activity, a great disposition to sadness.



an idea of future evil, and a I0112: train of similar

* O

sensations, which powerfully contribute to debilitate the general system; this effect is manifested by the body becoming feeble and meagre, the appetite voracious, the organs of generation so flaccid and enfeebled, that the slightest titulation produces erection, which is succeeded by emission and depression of spirits; these symptoms, by constant repetition, become very unpleasant during night; in short, this at last produces a constant discharge of a thin, clear, and slimy liquid. This is followed by that nervous irritability which in delicate constitutions lays the foundation of more serious consequences, and if persisted in, will reduce the patient to the last stage of a confirmed consumption.

In the delicate female, with these symptoms are united chlorosis. By this constant action the energy of the brain, and the nervous system will be completely destroyed. To treat the disease in this stage, to which it may arise in one case out of a thousand, as an imaginary one, would be the height of folly, and increase the general disposition to despondency, which forms one of the first objects of cure; for by gaining the confidence of your patient, you may divert his attention from the nature of his complaint, an object well worthy of medical consideration.

Dr. Falconer says, you ought to endeavour to



Si

excite the' fortitude of the sufferer bv representing' to him that it is unworthy of a brave and resolute character to be always complaining of his misfortunes., which are in a great measure incidental to all.” And the eloquent Sauvage says, the attendants of such patients should constantly endeavour to abstract their minds from reflecting on their own health and situation.”

Perhaps to a want of attention on the first commencement of the disease, may be attributed the alarming increase of insanity; a disease that has been so well written upon by Dr. W illiam Perfect, in his Annals of Insanity, illustrated with cases , as leaves me little to say' on that division.

From the frequent opportunity I have had of treating insanity in all its complicated stages, I have remarked that its first symptoms will yield to medical aid; and the persuasion that the individual can never be restored to health and society, too frequently prevents the unhappy sufferer's friends from endeavouring to restore him. Feeling confident no assistance can be rendered, with a criminal indifference they permit the disease to advance, till it arrives at that luckless stage, where a removal, to the slaughter of reason, becomes necessary. Such a system of brutality and ignorance cannot be too much deprecated. It is during the suspension, during the confirmation of the actual disease,.



that medicine can with any assurance of success be applied.

I he plan of cure in this disease is somewhat complex. From the variety of characters its assumes in different constitutions, a general line of practice can only be here noticed : it may justly be ranked among the class we term opprobria medicorum. As the disease depends upon the affections of the mind, the first object is to gain, by every possible means, the confidence of the patient; and to endeavour to acquire a knowledge of the real state of the mind, so as to be able to form a judgment what advance the disease has made; for that which w as once ideal, by constaut care assumes an actual stage of dis ease.

Among the most singular of these effects, is that of Spinello, the celebrated painter, who painted the iall of the rebel angels in such tremendous shades, and gave so fierce a countenance to Lucifer, that he was so struck with horror himself, as ever after to believe the dasmon present. The mind, long occupied by the pursuit of one object, impresses its action so forciby on the brain, that the effect continues long after the cause has ceased. Such powerful impressions are not to be removed by magnifying the horrors of the disease, but by condoling with him respecting his foibles; reasoning with him on the nature of his disease, ridiculing his tenacity about future evil, pointing out the real



source of his sufferings ; telling him by what means his recovery depends upon himself, and what effect you expect from the remedies you apply; but above all you must endeavour to allure him from the deceitful charms of his filthy gratification ; for ibe object we have in view is to restore the energy of the brain and the nervous system, and to obviate the morbid association of ideas that produced the disease.

Lis:ht nutritive diet, wine and water, or brandy and water; no malt liquors. Camphor, opium, valerian, warm and cold bathing, in short, the whole restorative system.

NOCTURNAL EMISSIONS,

As unconnected with any improper practice, occasionally lay the foundation of seminal weakness and gleet,but is totally distinct from Onanism. This dls* arises from a spontaneous erection ot the penis, and a discharge takes place of semen, unsolicited by the patient; he frequently is unconscious ot it, till the act of emission wakes him. This either arises Irom a plenitude of vessels, or is the consequence of dreams. Spare diet, cold bathing, washing the pait* with cold spring water very frequently, a cool bedchamber, scanty covering of blankets on the bed ; in short, every thing that tends to diminish irrita-



tion. If marriage is recommended in the former disease. Nature here peculiarly solicits it.

SEMINAL WEAKNESS,

As the consequence of the two former diseases, I think it proper to close this department with. r lhe prominent character of seminal weakness is general, not partial debility, and is very frequently combined with venereal affection, very often accompanies gleet, and may occasionally precede it. Having fully entered upon this subject, as connected with venereal excitement, I shall here treat it as solely arising from the operation of the two former diseases.

It is in this stage we are to consider seminal weakness of a dangerous tendency. We generally find no particular affection of the organs of generation. The semen here flows from an involuntary action, while in the other two, the action of friction or titulation produces the discharge.

This disease is not a disease of health and repletion, but of ill health and depletion, induced by a morbid action, producing too general an excitement of the animal machine. In the two former stages copulation is recommended, because Nature herself dictates it; but in this we have a different object to obtain : for here we have to supply a superabundant waste of the semen—we have to



replete not deplete. A.nd however salutary sexual intercourse may be to the animal in perfect health, here it must be used with considerable prudence Many are the able and ingenious hypotheses that have engaged the attention of the learned to explain this mystic rite; but our actual knowledge of sexual intercourse is only built upon the phenomena it affords. We know' every being has its existence from this act; but as generation depends not merely on that alone, I shall state what belongs to it.

The ovium must be in a state of maturitv : there

J *

must be a great determination of blood to the womb, that, together with the venereal stimuli, shall solicit a certain action in the fallopian tubes, by which the fimbria: grasp the ovum that is to be impregnated. During the condition of the parts concerned, the semen virile must be propelled into the uterus, in order that its vivifying particles shall pass along the tube to the ovarium. Fecundation having actually taken place, a motion is induced in the vivified ovum, which ruptures the tender vesicle that contains it ; the action of the fimbria: of the fallopian tube is then induced, which grasps and conveys it into the tube ; which, by its peculiar peristaltic motion, conducts it into the cavity of the uterus, thereto vivify and maturite.

From this it evidently appears the semen is of the first importance to the animal economy, and



when repeatedly excited to emission by an unnatural stimuli, will make the parts feeble, and if carried to very great excess, must produce impotence, by rendering the semen so thin, as even to stain the linen yellow. Such semen has not had due time to concoct. It is not a matter of astonishment where these habits, or venery, are frequent, some manifest effect should be produced on the constitution ; the first more than the latter, because Nature is more consulted by one action than the other ; and as these organs first suffer (they receiving their nervous ramification from the spinal marrow), it has been concluded, w ith some analogy I must confess, to fact, as the commencement of Tabes Dorsalis : it may be the exciting, but never the predisposing cause.

I believe Tabes Dorsalis has rarely been brought on by actual venery. The distinction between venery and self-pollution consists in the one having no actual excitement, no proper object for emission; the masturbation loses all and gains nothing, while by excessive coition with a lovely woman, a man is not sensible of his lassitude and feeling: conscious of directing bis passions to their proper foecus, no remorse remain behind to become the gnawing canker-worm of the heart. Surely then this holds forth to the unhappy man a pleasing prospect of consolation, when he departs from this unnatural



practice—a practice lie ought to leave no means untried to break himself off.

Where the discharge conies away insensibly, a nourishing diet, with sea-bathing, and the use of tonics, are the only means to be resorted to. The following remedy has been found useful :

Take of the Essential Salt of Bark, two drachms. Opium, ten grains.

Gum Qlibanum, one drachm.

Camphor, one drachm.

Simple Syrup, sufficient to make a mass, to be made into forty-eight pills, three of which are to be taken two or three times a day. During the use of this medicine, where sea-bathing 1 can not be employed, the parts may be bathed with cold water, in which sea salt, and crude sal ammoniac have been dissolved in the proportion of a drachm of each or more, to the pint. When the discharge comes oil with a regular spasm or an emission, the use ol antispasmodic remedies will be proper, as,

1 ake of Russian Castor, one scruple.

Volatile Salts, ten grains.

Cinnamon Water, two ounces.

Gum Opium, quarter of a grain.

Syrup of Cloves, two drachms.

Essential Salt of Bark, ten grains, to be made into a draught, and taken twice g



day; or if a pill is preferred, the following may be substituted :

Take of Camphor, half a drachm ; to he dissolved in a few drops of Spirits of Wine, then add Essential Salt of Bark, one drachm,

Oil of Peppermint, ten drops.

Simple Syrup, sufficient to form a mass, to be divided into thirty pills; two or three to be taken at a time, and repeated as often as they may become necessary; that is, twice or three times a day, if the discharge is not suspended.

Hvpochondriacal diseases have been so fully and scientifically treated upon by Dr. R. Reece, in his Domestic Medical Guide, that 1 must refei my reader to his work for information on this sub-ject.

TABES DORSALIS.

Says Hippocrates, in the Tabes Dorsalis, the spinal marrow becomes dry, principally when the veins going to it have become obstructed, as well as the communications between it and the biain. on account of the general indisposition of the body, it becomes morbidly affected : it likewise

becomes dry, in consequence ofvenery. 'The patient is distressed with the following symptoms: An



aente pain is felt in the head, neck, and loins, and in the lumbar and crural muscles, so that lie is incapable of bending the legs; costiveness occurs, together with a difficulty of making water. At the beginning of the disease he is not so much distressed ; but the longer the disease is protracted the more violent do ail the symptoms become.

No plan of treatment can be laid down to meet the great variety of the causes and species that Ire-long to this complaint; for every stage, and every degree of that stage, admit of a great line of practice. 1 he object that strikes the attention is, to remove the cause that gave rise to the complaint ; to correct the acrimony of the fluids; to pretent obstructions; to discuss them when present ; that no inflammation, suppuration, or ulceration may intervene; and to support the general system. The whole nervous system is affected by this direful disease. Many are the sources from whence it oriari—

o

nates. Hippocrates says, “Young married people are more the subject of it than others:” from this it would appear, he conceived the frequent emission of ihe semen to be the most general cause; because it chiefly originates from the medulla spinalis ; and when we consider the situation of the spinal marrow, its use and its connection, we must confess his reasoning is perfectly correct. In speaking of the more advanced stages, he says, “ The patient feels a sensation as if ants were creeping



down from bis bead to bis spine and this sensation we can reconcile, when we reflect that the spinal marrow is invested with a continuation of the membranes of the brain, which terminate at the bottom of the spine. Seminal fluid flows involunta-' lily when be voids bis urine, or goes to stool; and. so weak is the nature of such vitiated semen, that it remains not in the uterus after copulation ; in short, general weakness succeeds, and death is welcomed

O

as an harbinger of a better world.

In giving the direction towards the mode of cure, the age, temperament, and general habits of the patient are to be considered, as w ell as the climate. General rules, therefore, can only be spoken of here, and those are comprised in a small compass : restraining the passions, proper diet, keeping the bowels open, the mind occupied, a change of air, no animal food, milk, fruits, &c. &c. ibis must shew the absurdity of supposing any particular medicine can be adapted to meet with success the various stages of this disease ; and if this is a demonstrative fact, which unquestionably it is, how is it possible any individual can so prepare a medicine as to assimilate itself to every constitution ?

Under these distressing circumstances, a patient ought to lose no time in applying for advice ; for dreadful exulceration of the hone, w hen once commenced, not only reduces the bone it attacks to a



mere mass of mouldering corruption, but threatens the whole frame; thus inducing, in the active bloom of life, all the decrepitude of old age: for, not satisfied with extending its most distressing symptoms to the bones, it attacks the nerves in their several ramifications, the periosteum, medullary substance, and the adjoining tendons of the muscles; consequently the pain must be bevoud description. To lay down a plan for the cure of this disease for the patient would be useless, as it requires the early attention of medicine to correct; and when it is recalled to your recollection, that not less than ten thousand annually die in this Island, through this disease, I cannot offer a better apylogy for not leaving the patient to his own discretion. The great despondency of mind of people labouring under this disease, has generally been treated with too much levity; for if a medical man w ill, on its first approach, doubt of its existence, how is it possible to avert a danger he sees not near ? I strongly recommend to everv patient, labouring under the idea of the existence of the disease, to use every exertion in his power to keep the mind actively employed, and regulate his conduct by temperance.



SPINA VENTOSA.

No part of the human body is more subject to disease than the bones; they tumify, inflame, ulcerate, corrode, and dissolve, and occasionally lose their ossified stamina: thus it is they are peculiarly subject to venereal virus. The most dreadful ot the whole is Spina Ycntosa, a disease that when once formed, I believe, never yields to medical art; but it is a very great consolation to reflect, that this formidable disease rarely occurs.

When the disease has positively taken place, every ossified part of the bone becomes the seat of inflammation and exulceration, and oi course the contiguous parts must softer: for in the interioi chamber of this canal we find the spinal marrow lodged. We find it defends the thoracic and ahdo-minal viscera, supports the head, and gives general solidity to the whole body.

The great importance of this firm, hut flexible union of bones must be obvious ; hence when inflammation takes place, the pain must be beyond description; its first symptoms area sensation of constant gnawing in the bone, as it it was bruised and grinding; and in the musculary parts as it torn away. This proceeds with increasing pain, till at length a tumour is formed, which bursts



and exfoliates, and if Nature is sufficiently vigorous, new ossifications take place, and the disease terminates favourably ; but the more usual termination is, by the infection contaminating the contiguous parts, and reducing the whole body to a mere mass of corruption : the medical treatment is here directed to support the patient’s strength, and endeavour to excite an early exfoliation, by the introduction of bark and wine.

VENEREAL AFFECTIONS OF THE EONES.

\

Next to the skiu, the poison in its progress attacks the bones, first by sharp pains, felt particularly in the night time, which depart as the morning advances. These pains are succeeded by some swellings or thickening of the bone, where the pain is most acute. The bones most liable to be affected in this manner, are generally the hardest of the body, as the shin bone, shoulder bone, and also the bones of the head. This swelling is distinguished from other swellings by its situation, by its extreme hardness, bv the hot pain attending it, and by this pain becoming more intense every night.



TREATMENT.

Tin’s stage of the disease may be considered as one of the most inveterate, and a cure cannot be expected under a course of three months. The mercury should be thrown in by unction, and particularly from the neighbourhood of the skin, or surface where the swelling is situated, in order that the medicine may pass directly through the swelling. On the swelling itself, the mercurial plaster, as formerly recommended in bubo, or in place of it, the mercurial plaster with guin ammoniac, may be applied. Should these applications have no influence in lessening the swelling, and it shows strong marks of indolence or want of inflammation, it may next be attacked by a blister applied over it, which, as soon as a discharge takes place, will tend to lessen the size. During this plan, the use of the diet drink prescribed above, may be liberally employed; and when the pain is very severe, an opiate may be regularly indulged in at night, the form of which was given under the head of Clap. These are the three principal stages of the Venereal Disease, in its constitutional form; and when the patient has been neglected, and no attempts made at a cure, or where the medicine has not had sufficient

H



power to check its progress, then ulcers form in the parts described, as attacked by the infection, and these ulcers are combined wi'h peculiar circumstances, either from their situation and the texture of the parts they occupy, or from a fault in the patient’s constitution, which renders them difficult to cure. Such ulcers have their sides and bottoms, of a dirty brown appearance, with a fetid acrid discharge, often of a green colour ; and this state of the part cannot be changed by any outward application alone. Vr here the situation of this ulcer is on the part occupied by a blotch, or previous eruption, it gives little pain, but it gradually deepens till it reaches the bone; and if it continue long, a probe may be even passed into the bone ; where the ulcer is situated over a bone, and is the consequence of its swelling, it is more painful, and its cure is much more tedious than the former. There are two particular situations where the hones are apt to be affected by such ulcers. The first is the forehead, the bone of which often becomes ulcerated from this disease, and the bones of the head are 'generally sooner destroyed by it; nay, it is no uncommon occurrence to meet with holes or perforations reaching to the brain ; sometimes portions of the skull push out in various shapes, not unlike sprouts of coral. The second situation where such ulcers are most apt to appear, is the



♦

99

bone of the nose ; and from the very delicate structure of the parts, their progress here is very rapid. The whole palate will be often destroyed in a week, and the thin plates of bone within the nose, so soon as they become affected, very quickly lose the principle of life, and before a cure can be effected, they must separate or be thrown off, which is often attended with the most hideous deformity to the patient, and indeed he may be very thankful if he does not lose his life. This ulcer is always attended with the most offensive discharge, which renders it one of the most serious symptoms of the disease. The treatment of all the ulcers in this very advanced stage of the disease, requires much perseverance in the use of mercury, and at the same time to regulate it by what the constitution of the patient can bear. It will be sometimes necessary to give up the course entirely, to put the patient on a bracing plan, and then to begin it anew; along with the mercury it will also be requisite to use every other means that can assist. Thus, the warm bath will be often useful, in order to allow the mercury to accumulate in the body, and to take off symptoms of irritation. The long continued harassing pain from the disease, must be allayed by a proper use of opium; and the weakness and loss of tone which the medicine may produce, are to be got the better of, •or prevented going too far, by the bark, steel,



and other strengthening medicines, forms of all which have been already introduced in the preceding part of this work. With respect to the local management of such ulcers, they are to be dressed on the same principles as directed in chancres, when situated externally, and in addition to the forms already given, may be added the following :

Take of Calomel, one drachm.

Mucilage of Gum Arabic, one ounce.

Form them into an ointment, with which the sore

may be dressed ; or.

Take of Citrine Ointment, half an ounce,

Spermacet Ointment, an ounce and a half.

Mix them into an ointment, to be used as the former. Before applying these ointments, the ulcers should be washed with a weak solution of corrosive sublimate, or lunar caustic, according to the forms already detailed under Clap and Chancre. Ulcers of the nose require more particular attention in their treatment than any other. The mercurial action must be'produced as quickly as possible, and persevered in unremittingly, till the progress of the ulceration appears checked; it may then be continued more slow ly, but should not be given up for a great length of time, till all danger of a relapse is past.



BRITTLENESS OF THE BONES.

A more miserable and wretched condition cannot be conceived ; the Spina Ventosa is known to exist from a decrease of stature, while this is marked by a fracture of the bones on the slightest occasions. These are generally incurable ; the hark and tonics, with similar remedies, will he proper. When those disorders really proceed from too much venery, or positive pollution, for I consider pollution may be divided into two distinct classes, a negative and positive one. Under the head of the first, I consider that involuntary flux of semen that takes place when a man in sound health has had no connection for some days, and during sleep he emits it; this, I contend, is no disease, hut merely an effort of nature to unload vessels that require depletion. Under the positive, I comprehend that species of it that habit has rendered familiar, and that takes place twice, thrice, or ofteuer in twenty-four hours. In this stage it diminishes the energy of the nervous or muscular powers, and lays the foundation of those diseases we have just treated upon. The same plan is applicable to the female, under the general restrictions which medicine is given to them. I consider these diseases, if properly treated in their first stage, to be within our limits of cure in both

sexes.



The following Cases are merely given to shew the necessity of a strict attention on the part of the patient, to the means recommended for his cure: for I am certain that many of the cases I daily see, arise more from inattention on the part of the patient, than from any other cause, who too frequently thinks himself well, when only the disease is just beginning to subside. Always bear in recollection that a cure is not to be expected while you continue to take your usual diet: for it stimulates the arterial system, and excites and promotes re-action. *The cases of stricture are given to prove the necessity of a bougie, possessing a medical, as w ell as a mechanical action; nevertheless the bougie is not solely to be relied upon; for stricture arising from venereal action, you must combine with it the alterative plan. Stricture is often a constitutional disease, to which every passage of the body is liable lined with a secreting membrane; for this disposition to stricture is equally conspicuous in certain persons, as a tendency to warts and other excrescences of the skin ; but that it more frequently is brought on by the excitement of general irritation, is not less obvious: nine hundred and ninety nine out of

a thousand cases, however, of stricture arise from venereal excitement, and where the contrary is actually the case, there must be a strong constitutional disposition to produce it; and when thus produced, a relapse is nearly certain.



CASES.

A gentleman, about thirty-nine years of age, having had strictures in the urethra lor near twenty years, consulted me on the probable issue of his complaint. By the direction of an eminent sui-geon, the armed bougie was passed sevcial times , w hich, in consequence of its increasing the in itation, was left off: I shall give the remainder of the case from the patient’s letter.

“ There are several strictures in the passage, which occasion very great pain. I have not lately used the bougie much, but have gone on as well as I could, sometimes making water in a small stream, sometimes only by drops, and sometimes not at all, till a bougie is introduced. I frequently find, when in the act of making water, something in the passage give way, after which the stream increases. 1 have for some time past had occasional connexion with women, which I think rather increases the stream, but relaxes the parts.

e; About a fortnight since I tw r ice used a small catgut bougie, which has occasioned so much irritation, that 1 have been in misery ever sinee. I find I can sometimes make water in a much greater

stream than at other times.

“ I have generally a very great desire to make water, which I am sometimes obliged to do several



times in an hour ; frequently very suddenly, accompanied with excruciating pain, so that ray life a burden to me. I have frequently had swelled testicles, and have now the spermatic coid swelled to a small hard knob : this disease has much impaired my strength. There is always a discharge from the passage, occasioned by making water, which very much stains my linen, and is ofien tinged with blood. I used frequently to feel throbbing pains in the nut of the yard, and in a day or tw o after, small pimples would arise wi h white heads, which in a day or two more would discharge a thin matter, and then heal up. At the same time the prepuce would ache and swell, and a discharge take place much resembling a clap, which would fret the skin, and be very sore : this would also disappear in a few days. These symptoms have been decreasing, and I am now seldom troubled with them. The whole, I believe, was occasioned by an ill-managed clap, for which I was once salivated, hut it did me no service.”

By the use of the medicated bougie this gentleman is rapidly advancing to health.

The following letter is also sufficiently explanatory to convey its importance to every mind :—





“ About three years ago, a gleet, difficulty of making water, &c. induced me to fear that I had a stricture in the urethra. Upon application to one of the most eminent surgeons in the metropolis, (



found my fears but too well grounded. He passed four or five bougies with difficulty, and having enlarged the passage, proposed the nitrate ot silver.

I very reluctantly submitted, and it was attended with the usual painful symptoms, violent haemor-rhaco, &c. Perceiving that he seemed resohed to continue the use of it, after submitting to it for a few weeks, I discontinued going to that gentleman, as the pain was so violent during, and after, introduction, that I firmly made up my mind, whatever might be the consequence, never to undergo a similar operation.

The unfortunate result of my applicat ion deterred me for a long time from consulting any other medical gentleman ; the complaint of course increased, and became troublesome. I then waited (about a year ago) on a friend of mine, a surgeon of eminence, and stated my case. He with great difficulty introduced a small bougie into the bladder ; by attending about twice a week, I got considerably better. He then hinted about the propriety of using the kali purum, which 1 dread quile as much as the nitras argenti. 1 again left oft' introducing bougies, or rather getting them introduced. It is now about six weeks since, that finding all the unpleasant svmptoms considerably increased, I again applied to my friend, who found three strictures, all extremely contracted; one particularly, so as to admit with the utmost trouble, a bougie of nearly the smallest



size. I have been to him eight or ten times, but as he renews bis suggestion as to the propriety of using kali purum, and that I am determined not to suffer any caustic to be again introduced, I have made up my mind to avail myself of the assistance of some gentleman who does not use the caustic. Having purchased your Treatise, and the sentiments you profess having appeared to be dictated by sound sense, experience, and humanity, I am desirous of submitting my case to you. I have only to add, that I am thirty-three years of age, of a tolerably good constitution, but of a most uncommonly nervous and irritable system. I have a wife and children, and no man can be more blessed in the domestic state than I am; indeed I love my wife more, probably, than I ought, considering my complaint; but this is the only excess that I commit, as, in point of diet, no man can be more rigidly abstinent than I am. I never drink wine, or even malt liquors, only toast and water.”

I have given these cases because they are recent, in preference to those long since cured ; and more particularly to show that after the fair trials the armed bougies have had, they really fall short of the eulogium they have received. In both these cases they did injury ; the first was an actual case of stricture, the second a spasmodic one ; for the bougie in this patient was introduced with great pain, but fortunately without hemorrhage ; whereas iu



cases of actual stricture, the bougie invariably passes with great facility till it comes in contact with the stricture. The bougie I fir§t intioduced in this case, was one ol a moderate size ; in the application of all bougies care must be used ; indeed no patient ought to introduce it him sell, and when they do, care should be taken to bend the bougie, so that it may take the curve of the urethra. I his is necessary in the application of every kind of bougie, but more particularly in the use ol the metallic ones, when under the influence of a mercurial course, as the inventor affirms the least touch of the mercury will make the bougie brittle, and liable to break. The influence mercury possesses on these bougies, renders them inadmissible in almost cveiy case of stricture; as I am well convinced few cases will yield only to the use of the bougie, we want something more than a mere wedge. These bougies produce an increased secretion—-it is by their act of stimuli, which any extraneous body will produce, and what power a galvanic principle possesses in urethral cases, I must confess I am ignorant of. I maintain the primary cause of stricture is venereal excitement in the generality of cases ; therefore to get rid of the primary and secondary causes, mercury is absolutely necessary ; how, under these circumstanees, a metallic bougie is with confidence to be applied, I know not: such speculative reasoning, however high the authority that accom-



pariies it, will never make me desert the opinion I have formed from fact and analogy. In one class of stricture alone do I admit of their use; that is, in constitutional, stricture, where we only want, in fact, mere dilatation, a suppurative action militating against the cure. C/an a patient determine, with accurate precision, between a constitutional and venereal stricture ?

This gentleman was also troubled with a violent itching round the perineum and contiguous parts. It commenced, he stated, with the stricture; various were the applications resorted to for its cure; hitherto they have failed to give relief beyond the moment. This is only the second case I have met with accompanied by this unpleasant sensation, and in neither could the existence of ascavides be traced. In every other respect this gentleman is much improved, and little doubt remains of his cure.

A gentleman, on bis return from a Foreign Era bassy, contracted a gleet, which, after a period of three years brought on stricture. At the commencement of this disease, the symptoms w ere trivial, and he w'as treated with injections and the usual mode of cure; but in order to facilitate it, he imprudently had the strength of his injection considerably increased, which occasioned swelled testicles. The gonorrhoea was fortunately brought back, aud a mere discharge continued for six months. In this stage the medicated bpugie was applied : and in the



course of a few weeks., with the alterative plan, he was cured.

A gentleman who had lived a very irregular life, contracted a gonorrhoea, of which little notice was taken for two or three weeks. Being obliged to leave town for a few days, and living during his absence uncommon free, a phymosis was the consequence, which in twenty-four hours was succeeded by mortification; and when he reached town apart of the glans penis appeared through the praputium.

A strong emetic was immediately given, a charcoal poultice applied every two hours to the membrane. During the first three days bark and wine were freely administered; this stopped the progress of the mortification. On the third night a spontaneous bleeding took place, and after this the sores began to heal, the glans penis regenerated. He afterwards submitted to the regular course of medicine, and was completely restored to health. It is a singular circumstance that in this case his medical attendant suspected no existence of chancre; nor during the sloughing of the parts did I discover any. In phymosis and paraphymosis, we must be speedy in our operation, for gangrene is always to be apprehended. Where we can avoid a surgical operation, we ought; but it the symptoms run high, the incision of the pra?putium becomes necessary, in order to avoid mortification.

A person about forty years of age, who, in con-



no

sequence of a gleet, applied to me. I found from his statement thathe made watertwclve or fourteen times a day, in fact he could not restrain himself from it, when he felt the inclination, be where he would. On examination I found two strictures; the first was dilated with little trouble, and the second yielded on the third introduction of the bougie. By its use in six weeks, he had no difficulty in retaining his urine, and has had no return of either gleet or incontinence. It is a matter of high importance to attend to the different causes by which incontinence of urine is produced, for though a remedy may be well calculated for one species of disease, it may prove as highly injurious in another. Cantharides and the cold bath were the internal and external remedies.

A young man of twenty-five years of age, applied to me, who had a natural stricture in the urethra, from his birth; often obliged to take ten and fifteen minutes in voiding his urine, and that with great difficulty and pain, the stream being not larger than a common thread. The common bougie was applied at various periods, and gave some relief by enlarging the diameter of the urethra, but the parts always rccontracted. I applied the metallic bougie for two months; at the end of which he made a pint of water in the course of a minute, and that in a full stream. This is all that can be expected in this case, for a relapse is ever to be anti-



cipated, as this obstruction evidently arose from the enlargement of the corpus spongiosum urethrae. Cases have occurred where this enlargement has totally obstructed the passage of the urine. A relaxed state of the parts should always be induced prior to the introduction of the bougie, and should inflammation intervene, it3 use must be deferred for a few davs.

J

A gentleman for the last seven years had been troubled with stricture, and which was then increasing. The passage of the urethra was nearly obliterated, all the way to the top. In this perplexing situation, the urine burst into the cellular membrane of the perinffium, and from thence formed an opening for the urine to flow. The parts were much swelled, inflamed, and very painful. I first applied a small bougie at the orifice of the urethra, and, by proceeding from day to day, at last obtained a free passage into the bladder. In the course of five months the water passed by its natural channel, and the fistula w r as cured. The hollow bougie was employed in this case, otherwise the urine in micturition would have prevented its healing. All abscesses in perinaao ought to be immediately opened, when a fluctuation of matter can be fairly felt by the finger, as the opening may prevent a portion of the urethra sloughing. The advantage of a medicated bougie was here strongly indicated. The great Daran says in hi,s



f

pamphlet, “ That the composition of his bougies was not so strict as not to admit of proper alteration, according to the exigency of each case”—which will support my former assertion, that by a variation of the composition of the bougie much may be done.

A Gentleman of a very scorbutic habit was affected with gonorrhoea ; to remove which recourse was had to the usual remedies, without any success. The discharge had never been very copious. The urine flowed as usual. He suffered great pain from a continued heat in the urethra, about an inch and a half from the orifice, (this heat I have often met with, long after the symptoms of gonorrhoea were gone by; it generally attends scorbutic habit, and often accompanies the first symptom of stricture). Having lately lived very free, incontinence came on ; the bougie was a plied, and the difficulty of retaining'the water ceased, the discharge diminished, and every- other symptom left him, but the peculiar sen-sal ion above described. In a fortnight after he exposed himself to a fresh infection ; the gonorrhoea returned, and the sensation was no longer felt. Hi used an injection of six grains of white vitriol to six ounces of rose water, and took ten grains of nitre and gum arabic three times a day: bv these means the discharge was abating, when meeting with a female friend, with whom lie was imprudently



connected, returning home he felt as usual; but during the night a profuse discharge of blood and mucus took place, which gradually subsided on the third day. No. gonorrhoeal discharge, nor any other symptom afterwards appeared. Nature, by a critical effort, here relieved herself, and proves that a greater inflammation will destroy a less.

To Dr. Caton.

Sir— hen I had last the pleasure of seeing you in London, and bought the bougies, I was mentioning to you, how ill I had been in my complaint the beginning of the year; and you were so kind to say, if I would let you know in what manner I was affected, you would assist me with your advice : you were mentioning that I ought to keep the bougies in five or six hours at a time. I will now state to you my proceedings since I came home. Having many things to do in consequence of my absence, I had not a convenient opportunity of using them as I could wish, till about a month since, when I used them two days following, keeping them in four hours each day; but was obliged to desist, as they brought on a strangury, so that 1 could not pass my water without first putting in a bougie. I was therefore under the necessity to stop, and by making use of linseed tea, with other mucilaginous liquors, got better; and about a fortnight ago I was at-

i



tacked with a violent pain between the scrotum and the anus, and the abscess came on just between the two, with the most excruciating pain that a mortal could possibly suffer; and so it continued swelling till the Saturday morning after, when it broke, and discharged a great deal of white matter. The wound is quite well, but the swelling is not quite gone back, neither is the whole of the pain abated. During all the time I have passed my water tolerably well, but with a good deal of mucus in it, only just at the time the abscess was forming, and then my water was much heated, and the smell very disagreeable: there is still much mucus comes off with my water.

To Dr. Caton.

Sir— Having by accident seen your pamphlet, entitled, A Practical Treatise on the Venereal Disease , $c. I am induced, from the candour it seems to display, to submit my case to you, and to request your advice. I am one of those unfortunate people who have suffered from that pernicious habit of Onanism, which I see you notice in the Appendix. It is upwards of six years since the bad effects were first produced; at that time they rather assumed a serious appearance, but by the assistance of bark and sea-bathing they were so far removed, that for the last four years I have enjoyed



a tolerable, though by no means a good state of health. Before stating what my complaints are, it will be proper to inform you that I am twenty-five years of age, of a tall and thin habit of body; the latter has been not a little increased by my complaints. My profession is sedentary, being a good deal employed in writing. As I said above, for some years my health has been tolerable, though very far from good, and of late I think it has been getting worse. The first cause of the complaint has, as much as lies in my power, been removed ; but the bad effects in various ways still continue. I have been, and still am, very subject to nocturnal emissions, which continue and still increase my complaints. These happen at times two or three times a week, and at others not for fourteen days; but never have left me. The consequence is, as you easily understand, that the parts are very much debilitated ; and I am afraid, in addition, that one of my testicles (the left) is not in a sound state. There is no pain, but a considerable fulness in some of the vessels, and this does not always remain. Complaints in my stomach and bowels are what principally torment me, and these, I think, always proceed from flatulency and bile, and generally attended with costiveness. Of the latter I pass at times considerable quantities; after which,in general, my bowels seem so far eased, though always a good deal of uneasiness remains. Of late the bilious com-

i2



plaint seems to have so much increased as once or twice to produce vomiting and purging both at the same time : perhaps for this there might be another cause, but the principal, is certainly the weakness and irritation of my stomach. I think the most part of my complaints I have mentioned. You will perceive there is a good deal of what is called nervous, though I do not think any very serious complaint is yet formed ; yet certainly the unpleasantness of what I have, renders them sufficiently so. I have consulted a surgeon of no little eminence, and l)v his directions took considerable quantities of bark, and various other things, but nothing he prescribed seemed to have any effect: indeed T did not think he viewed matters exactly in that serious light I could have wished. This was only last summer. I bathed also very frequently during the summer, and indeed have every year, for many; and by the advice of a physician, a considerable time ago, I have taken from time to time of the bark; but nothing yet tried will do. I must therefore intreat you to give me your advice and assistance, and this I beg may be as particular and full as you think necessary. I have been perhaps more minute in describing my complaints than is requisite : but as I cannot see you, I thought this proper. I should think that even my seeing yoil (nhich may probably be in the course of eight or nine months) scarcely necessary, as any thihg you wish further



m

to know I can soon give; and I know so much of medicine as to give it so as to be understood. I should perhaps prefer your sending me medicines prepared even at the expence of the mail-coach carriage; but if the things are very' simple, it may be as well to send me a prescription.

To Dr. Cciton,

Sir —A gentleman, a friend of mine (a married man), having seen your publication recommending medicated bougies in disorders of the urethra, labours under a complaint of that kind, and has desired me to address you on the subject. His symptoms are thus described by him : when he has a desire of making water it does not flow in a full and copious stream, unless retarded by stopping it till the passage is full, but runs off in a small diminished stream, and if the skin is drawn back, divided into two small ones. Previous to the desire of passing his urine, a quickness or sharpness of sensation, at times amounting to pain, is felt about the glans, where he thinks much of'the disorder lies, attended sometimes with a forcing pain, which extends to the fundament. He was accustomed to live rather free, though a sober man, but this complaint has obliged him to confine himself altogether to water at his principal meals, for some time past; having suffered twice by drinking too treely, not



being able to pass any urine for several hours, by a dreadful strangury. He also says, lie is very sensible of a painful obstruction in the moment of emission, which always increases the difficulty and heat of passing urine the following day. He constantly observes something like small threads swimming in the urine. This disorder, he believes, was first brought on by taking calomel pills, as they were represented to him to be, too soon, in a venereal infection, which, though it cured him, laid the foundation of this complaint. When he first discovered it, being at that time unattended to, and in the way of seeing much company, neglected it, he was informed by many of his friends it was the gravel. He has no soreness or pain whatever outwardly, and in every other respect enjoys remarkable good health. For obvious reasons he himself has declined addressing you; you will, therefore. Sir, have the goodness to write to me, and send some of your bougies, with plain and full directions minutely, as to their application and use.

To Dr. Caton.

Sir — I am now in my 34th year, of naturally a good constitution, and rather given to be lusty, and in some measure inclined to a grossness, which nothing but change of air and exercise removes. The last seven years, and more particularly the lat-



ter part of this period, I have been closely confined to the desk; but during last summer, from April (when the warm weather first commenced) until I went to the sea in August, I was severely ill, owing partly to that close attention which I paid to business, and partly from being unable to change the air, and recruit the strength spent in that attention, my illness fell very much upon my nerves, and I still feel the effects of it. I have likewise been, and am much afflicted with a scrofulous complaint, which I took from a wet nurse by whom I was brought up, which is a constant source of uneasiness, and, I have no doubt, tends to diminish my strength in some respect. This humour is constantly breaking out upon the skin, which of course in some measure relieves it, and I am advised to have an issue for it, which may probably render it weaker, and thus strengthen and clear the constitution. But I feel more waste of strength from a degree of seminal weakness, which I have for some time laboured under, than from perhaps all the other causes put together. It generally happens involuntarily, in the course of the night, about, upon an average, every tenth day, sometimes once in a fortnight, sometimes once in a week, which I conceived might have occurred from the circumstance of the weather having been more bracing at one time than another; and from having perhaps lived a little



better some few days than others; and it seemed to me that when a certain quantity of semen had collected, it discharged itself, as before stated, perfectly involuntarily during sleep. It is also attended with a total weakness and want of power in the parts, particularly in the penis, which, for the purposes of generation, feels ineffectual, and before a connection with the other sex, discharges the semen without any of the strength and force necessary for the purposes above stated. How this was originally brought on, I cannot precisely say. W hether by means of the complaint I have stated, or from the indiscretion of younger days, or from the effects oi my constitution having been weakened of later years, and it may have occurred from a species of all. I therefore w'ish the case to be seriously considered, in order to get it remedied if possible.

I need not say that I do not wish names to be mentioned, that I wish the matter to be as private as possible, and that it may be considered without personal examination. I must also observe that I am naturally very liable to colds in the head, which affect me very much all over, and to a head-ache, which comes on with the evening, when I work, as I generally do, pretty closely ; and, as I conceive, arises very much from my nerves.

I have a good appetite, but not very good digestion; I breakfast at nine, dine at four, seldom take



any thing between those hours, take tea at halt past six, and sometimes a crust ot bread, or something of that kind for supper.

I usually have a glass of port wine every day after dinner, and in fact live regularly, and pretty well. I am not the least inclined to drink, nor have I suffered any thing from disease but what you • have been acquainted with, which was veiy trifling, but sufficient to make me rigidly caieful of a connection with women of the town. However, as I look forward, as most others do, to be settled comfortably in life, it is necessary, e\en upon this account, that I should be in possession of all those powers nature endowed me with, but which I certainly do not now possess.

I am not aware that I need say any thing more than that if medicine is necessary (as 1 presume it beyond all question is ) I wish it to be made up in pills, being most convenient to be taken , and I hope it will not require any peculiar restraint ot diet or any thing else, which will have the effect of putting me out of the regular course I now

pursue,

1 have omitted, however, to mention, that I fear from some pains which I have lately found in my back, &c. that I may be liable to gravel, which perhaps will be remedied by the same means as the complaint I have stated; but be this as it may, it will perhaps be necessary to know it. 1 also mean.



when the spring comes round, to use a bath pretty constantly, unless I should he advised to the contrary, on account of the head-aches I experience, and this prevented my bathing when I was at the sea this autumn, where I mean, if possible, to go every year, as it certainly tends to strengthen inv constitution.

THE END.



Books printed for S. Highley, Fleet-street.

1. A Practical Materia Medica, in which the various Articles are fully described, and divided into Classes and Orders, according to their Eti'ects. Their Virtues, Doses, and the Diseases in which they are proper to be exhibited, are fully pointed out. Interspersed with some practical Remarks, and some select Formulae. 1» which is added, a General Posological Table. Intended principally for the use of Students and Junior Practitioners. One vol. 12mo. Price 5s. in boards.

“ The little volume now before us contains some very judicious observations, worthy the attention of h^Fsdical Practitioners of all rallies. We are surprized indeed that the Author should have retained the order of Alexi-pharmics. The good sense and medical knowledge, however, which appear in almost every page, more than compensate for this antiquated error-There is much propriety in the classification of Stimulants, which are divided into fourteen orders; and as those medicines are most generally used, such an arrangement of them must be very convenient in constant

“ After treating of those substances usually considered as drugs, the Author of this useful volume of « Practical Materia. Medica” very properly adds some very sensible observations on Aliaments, and their more or less nutritous qualities. This is certainly the most valuable part of such a work.

“ This volume, from its merits and size, deserves a place on the desk of the young Druggist and Apothecary, as well as Physicians, who will find it verv convenient to consult on many occasions, particularly on what relates to the doses and effects of drugs in general.”— Anti-Jacobin Review, May,

1809. . . ,

“ A performance well calculated to be useful to Students and Practitioners .—Critical Review , Afrit, 1809.

2. An Essay, addressed to Medical Students, on the Importance and Utility of the Profession; and on the urgent Necessity there is for them to obtain a more perfect knowledge of its different Branches than is acquired by Pupils in general, See. Sec. foolscap, fivo. 2s. 6d. sewed.

«< This is a well-meant effusion of an intelligent and well-educated practitioner, who is deeply affected with the murderous ignorance ot the inferior classes of the medical tribe. We sincerely wish that all Students iu medical science or art would read this little Essay, which, although not distinguished by any brilliancy of wit or sentiment, is yet replete with good sense, most salutary advice, and considerable experience in medical tuition. A strict observance of the precepts here inculcated, must infallibly produce a good member of society, a skilful practitioner (particularly in .Surgery, which appears to be the branch contemplated by the writer), and lead to well-founded fame and fortune.”— Anti-Jacobin Review, October, 1808.

3. The London Medical and Surgical Spectator; or, Monthly Register of the State of Medicine in its various branches : containing, 1. A View of Empiricism, and its pernicious consequences to Society. 2. Original Communications, Cases, and Reviews in Medicine, Surgery, Midwifery, and Pharmacy. 3. Intelligence, consisting of Miscellaneous Matter, Notices of Publications, Medical Intelligence, See. See. Two vols. price 8vo. 1 1. 3a. bd. boards.



/

.





. .

- <





'

1



1





*





*





